“With potatoes and rice in it?”
“Yes.”
“I know it by heart. Bring soup and give us some tea.”
“Very well.”
Raskolnikov looked at all this with profound astonishment and a dull,
unreasoning terror. He made up his mind to keep quiet and see what would
happen. “I believe I am not wandering. I believe it’s reality,” he thought.
In a couple of minutes Nastasya returned with the soup, and announced that
the tea would be ready directly. With the soup she brought two spoons, two
plates, salt, pepper, mustard for the beef, and so on. The table was set as it had
not been for a long time. The cloth was clean.
“It would not be amiss, Nastasya, if Praskovya Pavlovna were to send us up a
couple of bottles of beer. We could empty them.”
“Well, you are a cool hand,” muttered Nastasya, and she departed to carry out
his orders.
Raskolnikov still gazed wildly with strained attention. Meanwhile Razumihin
sat down on the sofa beside him, as clumsily as a bear put his left arm round
Raskolnikov’s head, although he was able to sit up, and with his right hand gave
him a spoonful of soup, blowing on it that it might not burn him. But the soup
was only just warm. Raskolnikov swallowed one spoonful greedily, then a
second, then a third. But after giving him a few more spoonfuls of soup,
Razumihin suddenly stopped, and said that he must ask Zossimov whether he
ought to have more.
Nastasya came in with two bottles of beer.
“And will you have tea?”
“Yes.”
“Cut along, Nastasya, and bring some tea, for tea we may venture on without
the faculty. But here is the beer!” He moved back to his chair, pulled the soup
and meat in front of him, and began eating as though he had not touched food for
three days.
“I must tell you, Rodya, I dine like this here every day now,” he mumbled
with his mouth full of beef, “and it’s all Pashenka, your dear little landlady, who
sees to that; she loves to do anything for me. I don’t ask for it, but, of course, I
don’t object. And here’s Nastasya with the tea. She is a quick girl. Nastasya, my
dear, won’t you have some beer?”
“Get along with your nonsense!” 
