He turned away, and walked to the window. She stood a moment, looked at
him uneasily, and went out troubled.
No, he was not cold to her. There was an instant (the very last one) when he
had longed to take her in his arms and say good-bye to her, and even to tell her,
but he had not dared even to touch her hand.
“Afterwards she may shudder when she remembers that I embraced her, and
will feel that I stole her kiss.”
“And would she stand that test?” he went on a few minutes later to himself.
“No, she wouldn’t; girls like that can’t stand things! They never do.”
And he thought of Sonia.
There was a breath of fresh air from the window. The daylight was fading. He
took up his cap and went out.
He could not, of course, and would not consider how ill he was. But all this
continual anxiety and agony of mind could not but affect him. And if he were
not lying in high fever it was perhaps just because this continual inner strain
helped to keep him on his legs and in possession of his faculties. But this
artificial excitement could not last long.
He wandered aimlessly. The sun was setting. A special form of misery had
begun to oppress him of late. There was nothing poignant, nothing acute about
it; but there was a feeling of permanence, of eternity about it; it brought a
foretaste of hopeless years of this cold leaden misery, a foretaste of an eternity
“on a square yard of space.” Towards evening this sensation usually began to
weigh on him more heavily.
“With this idiotic, purely physical weakness, depending on the sunset or
something, one can’t help doing something stupid! You’ll go to Dounia, as well
as to Sonia,” he muttered bitterly.
He heard his name called. He looked round. Lebeziatnikov rushed up to him.
“Only fancy, I’ve been to your room looking for you. Only fancy, she’s carried
out her plan, and taken away the children. Sofya Semyonovna and I have had a
job to find them. She is rapping on a frying-pan and making the children dance.
The children are crying. They keep stopping at the cross-roads and in front of
shops; there’s a crowd of fools running after them. Come along!”
“And Sonia?” Raskolnikov asked anxiously, hurrying after Lebeziatnikov.