“But that’s not so, not so! Brother, what are you saying?”
“Ah, it’s not picturesque, not æsthetically attractive! I fail to understand why
bombarding people by regular siege is more honourable. The fear of appearances
is the first symptom of impotence. I’ve never, never recognised this more clearly
than now, and I am further than ever from seeing that what I did was a crime.
I’ve never, never been stronger and more convinced than now.”
The colour had rushed into his pale exhausted face, but as he uttered his last
explanation, he happened to meet Dounia’s eyes and he saw such anguish in
them that he could not help being checked. He felt that he had, anyway, made
these two poor women miserable, that he was, anyway, the cause...
“Dounia darling, if I am guilty forgive me (though I cannot be forgiven if I am
guilty). Good-bye! We won’t dispute. It’s time, high time to go. Don’t follow
me, I beseech you, I have somewhere else to go.... But you go at once and sit
with mother. I entreat you to! It’s my last request of you. Don’t leave her at all; I
left her in a state of anxiety, that she is not fit to bear; she will die or go out of
her mind. Be with her! Razumihin will be with you. I’ve been talking to him....
Don’t cry about me: I’ll try to be honest and manly all my life, even if I am a
murderer. Perhaps I shall some day make a name. I won’t disgrace you, you will
see; I’ll still show.... Now good-bye for the present,” he concluded hurriedly,
noticing again a strange expression in Dounia’s eyes at his last words and
promises. “Why are you crying? Don’t cry, don’t cry: we are not parting for
ever! Ah, yes! Wait a minute, I’d forgotten!”
He went to the table, took up a thick dusty book, opened it and took from
between the pages a little water-colour portrait on ivory. It was the portrait of his
landlady’s daughter, who had died of fever, that strange girl who had wanted to
be a nun. For a minute he gazed at the delicate expressive face of his betrothed,
kissed the portrait and gave it to Dounia.