His hair was soaked with sweat, his quivering lips were parched, his eyes
were fixed on the ceiling.
“Mother, sister—how I loved them! Why do I hate them now? Yes, I hate
them, I feel a physical hatred for them, I can’t bear them near me.... I went up to
my mother and kissed her, I remember.... To embrace her and think if she only
knew... shall I tell her then? That’s just what I might do.... She must be the same
as I am,” he added, straining himself to think, as it were struggling with
delirium. “Ah, how I hate the old woman now! I feel I should kill her again if
she came to life! Poor Lizaveta! Why did she come in?... It’s strange though,
why is it I scarcely ever think of her, as though I hadn’t killed her? Lizaveta!
Sonia! Poor gentle things, with gentle eyes.... Dear women! Why don’t they
weep? Why don’t they moan? They give up everything... their eyes are soft and
gentle.... Sonia, Sonia! Gentle Sonia!”
He lost consciousness; it seemed strange to him that he didn’t remember how
he got into the street. It was late evening. The twilight had fallen and the full
moon was shining more and more brightly; but there was a peculiar
breathlessness in the air. There were crowds of people in the street; workmen
and business people were making their way home; other people had come out for
a walk; there was a smell of mortar, dust and stagnant water. Raskolnikov
walked along, mournful and anxious; he was distinctly aware of having come
out with a purpose, of having to do something in a hurry, but what it was he had
forgotten. Suddenly he stood still and saw a man standing on the other side of
the street, beckoning to him. He crossed over to him, but at once the man turned
and walked away with his head hanging, as though he had made no sign to him.
“Stay, did he really beckon?” Raskolnikov wondered, but he tried to overtake
him. When he was within ten paces he recognised him and was frightened; it
was the same man with stooping shoulders in the long coat. Raskolnikov
followed him at a distance; his heart was beating; they went down a turning; the
man still did not look round. “Does he know I am following him?” thought
Raskolnikov. The man went into the gateway of a big house. Raskolnikov
hastened to the gate and looked in to see whether he would look round and sign
to him. In the court-yard the man did turn round and again seemed to beckon
him. Raskolnikov at once followed him into the yard, but the man was gone. He
must have gone up the first staircase. Raskolnikov rushed after him. He heard
slow measured steps two flights above. The staircase seemed strangely familiar.
He reached the window on the first floor; the moon shone through the panes with
a melancholy and mysterious light; then he reached the second floor. Bah! this is
the flat where the painters were at work... but how was it he did not recognise it
at once? The steps of the man above had died away. “So he must have stopped or
hidden somewhere.” He reached the third storey, should he go on? There was a
stillness that was dreadful.... But he went on. The sound of his own footsteps
scared and frightened him. How dark it was! The man must be hiding in some
corner here. Ah! the flat was standing wide open, he hesitated and went in. It
was very dark and empty in the passage, as though everything had been
removed; he crept on tiptoe into the parlour which was flooded with moonlight.
Everything there was as before, the chairs, the looking-glass, the yellow sofa and
the pictures in the frames. A huge, round, copper-red moon looked in at the
windows. “It’s the moon that makes it so still, weaving some mystery,” thought
Raskolnikov. He stood and waited, waited a long while, and the more silent the
moonlight, the more violently his heart beat, till it was painful. And still the
same hush. Suddenly he heard a momentary sharp crack like the snapping of a
splinter and all was still again.  
