“Ich danke,” said the latter, and softly, with a rustle of silk she sank into the
chair. Her light blue dress trimmed with white lace floated about the table like an
air-balloon and filled almost half the room. She smelt of scent. But she was
obviously embarrassed at filling half the room and smelling so strongly of scent;
and though her smile was impudent as well as cringing, it betrayed evident
uneasiness.
The lady in mourning had done at last, and got up. All at once, with some
noise, an officer walked in very jauntily, with a peculiar swing of his shoulders
at each step. He tossed his cockaded cap on the table and sat down in an easychair. The small lady positively skipped from her seat on seeing him, and fell to
curtsying in a sort of ecstasy; but the officer took not the smallest notice of her,
and she did not venture to sit down again in his presence. He was the assistant
superintendent. He had a reddish moustache that stood out horizontally on each
side of his face, and extremely small features, expressive of nothing much except
a certain insolence. He looked askance and rather indignantly at Raskolnikov; he
was so very badly dressed, and in spite of his humiliating position, his bearing
was by no means in keeping with his clothes. Raskolnikov had unwarily fixed a
very long and direct look on him, so that he felt positively affronted.
“What do you want?” he shouted, apparently astonished that such a ragged
fellow was not annihilated by the majesty of his glance.
“I was summoned... by a notice...” Raskolnikov faltered.
“For the recovery of money due, from the student,” the head clerk interfered
hurriedly, tearing himself from his papers. “Here!” and he flung Raskolnikov a
document and pointed out the place. “Read that!”
“Money? What money?” thought Raskolnikov, “but... then... it’s certainly not
that.”
And he trembled with joy. He felt sudden intense indescribable relief. A load
was lifted from his back.
“And pray, what time were you directed to appear, sir?” shouted the assistant
superintendent, seeming for some unknown reason more and more aggrieved.
“You are told to come at nine, and now it’s twelve!”
“The notice was only brought me a quarter of an hour ago,” Raskolnikov
answered loudly over his shoulder. To his own surprise he, too, grew suddenly
angry and found a certain pleasure in it. “And it’s enough that I have come here
ill with fever.”
“Kindly refrain from shouting!” 
