“No, no,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna hurriedly interrupted, “you thought I was
going to cross-question you in the womanish way I used to; don’t be anxious, I
understand, I understand it all: now I’ve learned the ways here and truly I see for
myself that they are better. I’ve made up my mind once for all: how could I
understand your plans and expect you to give an account of them? God knows
what concerns and plans you may have, or what ideas you are hatching; so it’s
not for me to keep nudging your elbow, asking you what you are thinking about?
But, my goodness! why am I running to and fro as though I were crazy...? I am
reading your article in the magazine for the third time, Rodya. Dmitri Prokofitch
brought it to me. Directly I saw it I cried out to myself: ‘There, foolish one,’ I
thought, ‘that’s what he is busy about; that’s the solution of the mystery! Learned
people are always like that. He may have some new ideas in his head just now;
he is thinking them over and I worry him and upset him.’ I read it, my dear, and
of course there was a great deal I did not understand; but that’s only natural—
how should I?”
“Show me, mother.”
Raskolnikov took the magazine and glanced at his article. Incongruous as it
was with his mood and his circumstances, he felt that strange and bitter sweet
sensation that every author experiences the first time he sees himself in print;
besides, he was only twenty-three. It lasted only a moment. After reading a few
lines he frowned and his heart throbbed with anguish. He recalled all the inward
conflict of the preceding months. He flung the article on the table with disgust
and anger.
“But, however foolish I may be, Rodya, I can see for myself that you will very
soon be one of the leading—if not the leading man—in the world of Russian
thought. And they dared to think you were mad! You don’t know, but they really
thought that. Ah, the despicable creatures, how could they understand genius!
And Dounia, Dounia was all but believing it—what do you say to that? Your
father sent twice to magazines—the first time poems (I’ve got the manuscript
and will show you) and the second time a whole novel (I begged him to let me
copy it out) and how we prayed that they should be taken—they weren’t! I was
breaking my heart, Rodya, six or seven days ago over your food and your clothes
and the way you are living. But now I see again how foolish I was, for you can
attain any position you like by your intellect and talent. No doubt you don’t care
about that for the present and you are occupied with much more important
matters....”
“Dounia’s not at home, mother?”