It happened once or twice, however, that Pulcheria Alexandrovna gave such a
turn to the conversation that it was impossible to answer her without mentioning
where Rodya was, and on receiving unsatisfactory and suspicious answers she
became at once gloomy and silent, and this mood lasted for a long time. Dounia
saw at last that it was hard to deceive her and came to the conclusion that it was
better to be absolutely silent on certain points; but it became more and more
evident that the poor mother suspected something terrible. Dounia remembered
her brother’s telling her that her mother had overheard her talking in her sleep on
the night after her interview with Svidrigaïlov and before the fatal day of the
confession: had not she made out something from that? Sometimes days and
even weeks of gloomy silence and tears would be succeeded by a period of
hysterical animation, and the invalid would begin to talk almost incessantly of
her son, of her hopes of his future.... Her fancies were sometimes very strange.
They humoured her, pretended to agree with her (she saw perhaps that they were
pretending), but she still went on talking.
Five months after Raskolnikov’s confession, he was sentenced. Razumihin
and Sonia saw him in prison as often as it was possible. At last the moment of
separation came. Dounia swore to her brother that the separation should not be
for ever, Razumihin did the same. Razumihin, in his youthful ardour, had firmly
resolved to lay the foundations at least of a secure livelihood during the next
three or four years, and saving up a certain sum, to emigrate to Siberia, a country
rich in every natural resource and in need of workers, active men and capital.
There they would settle in the town where Rodya was and all together would
begin a new life. They all wept at parting.
Raskolnikov had been very dreamy for a few days before. He asked a great
deal about his mother and was constantly anxious about her. He worried so much
about her that it alarmed Dounia. When he heard about his mother’s illness he
became very gloomy. With Sonia he was particularly reserved all the time. With
the help of the money left to her by Svidrigaïlov, Sonia had long ago made her
preparations to follow the party of convicts in which he was despatched to
Siberia. Not a word passed between Raskolnikov and her on the subject, but both
knew it would be so. At the final leave-taking he smiled strangely at his sister’s
and Razumihin’s fervent anticipations of their happy future together when he
should come out of prison. He predicted that their mother’s illness would soon
have a fatal ending. Sonia and he at last set off.