“I have mentioned already that Pyotr Petrovitch is just setting off for
Petersburg, where he has a great deal of business, and he wants to open a legal
bureau. He has been occupied for many years in conducting civil and
commercial litigation, and only the other day he won an important case. He has
to be in Petersburg because he has an important case before the Senate. So,
Rodya dear, he may be of the greatest use to you, in every way indeed, and
Dounia and I have agreed that from this very day you could definitely enter upon
your career and might consider that your future is marked out and assured for
you. Oh, if only this comes to pass! This would be such a benefit that we could
only look upon it as a providential blessing. Dounia is dreaming of nothing else.
We have even ventured already to drop a few words on the subject to Pyotr
Petrovitch. He was cautious in his answer, and said that, of course, as he could
not get on without a secretary, it would be better to be paying a salary to a
relation than to a stranger, if only the former were fitted for the duties (as though
there could be doubt of your being fitted!) but then he expressed doubts whether
your studies at the university would leave you time for work at his office. The
matter dropped for the time, but Dounia is thinking of nothing else now. She has
been in a sort of fever for the last few days, and has already made a regular plan
for your becoming in the end an associate and even a partner in Pyotr
Petrovitch’s business, which might well be, seeing that you are a student of law. I
am in complete agreement with her, Rodya, and share all her plans and hopes,
and think there is every probability of realising them. And in spite of Pyotr
Petrovitch’s evasiveness, very natural at present (since he does not know you),
Dounia is firmly persuaded that she will gain everything by her good influence
over her future husband; this she is reckoning upon. Of course we are careful not
to talk of any of these more remote plans to Pyotr Petrovitch, especially of your
becoming his partner. He is a practical man and might take this very coldly, it
might all seem to him simply a day-dream. Nor has either Dounia or I breathed a
word to him of the great hopes we have of his helping us to pay for your
university studies; we have not spoken of it in the first place, because it will
come to pass of itself, later on, and he will no doubt without wasting words offer
to do it of himself, (as though he could refuse Dounia that) the more readily
since you may by your own efforts become his right hand in the office, and
receive this assistance not as a charity, but as a salary earned by your own work.
Dounia wants to arrange it all like this and I quite agree with her. And we have
not spoken of our plans for another reason, that is, because I particularly wanted
you to feel on an equal footing when you first meet him. When Dounia spoke to
him with enthusiasm about you, he answered that one could never judge of a
man without seeing him close, for oneself, and that he looked forward to
forming his own opinion when he makes your acquaintance. Do you know, my
precious Rodya, I think that perhaps for some reasons (nothing to do with Pyotr
Petrovitch though, simply for my own personal, perhaps old-womanish, fancies)
I should do better to go on living by myself, apart, than with them, after the
wedding. I am convinced that he will be generous and delicate enough to invite
me and to urge me to remain with my daughter for the future, and if he has said
nothing about it hitherto, it is simply because it has been taken for granted; 
