A strange period began for Raskolnikov: it was as though a fog had fallen
upon him and wrapped him in a dreary solitude from which there was no escape.
Recalling that period long after, he believed that his mind had been clouded at
times, and that it had continued so, with intervals, till the final catastrophe. He
was convinced that he had been mistaken about many things at that time, for
instance as to the date of certain events. Anyway, when he tried later on to piece
his recollections together, he learnt a great deal about himself from what other
people told him. He had mixed up incidents and had explained events as due to
circumstances which existed only in his imagination. At times he was a prey to
agonies of morbid uneasiness, amounting sometimes to panic. But he
remembered, too, moments, hours, perhaps whole days, of complete apathy,
which came upon him as a reaction from his previous terror and might be
compared with the abnormal insensibility, sometimes seen in the dying. He
seemed to be trying in that latter stage to escape from a full and clear
understanding of his position. Certain essential facts which required immediate
consideration were particularly irksome to him. How glad he would have been to
be free from some cares, the neglect of which would have threatened him with
complete, inevitable ruin.
He was particularly worried about Svidrigaïlov, he might be said to be
permanently thinking of Svidrigaïlov. From the time of Svidrigaïlov’s too
menacing and unmistakable words in Sonia’s room at the moment of Katerina
Ivanovna’s death, the normal working of his mind seemed to break down. But
although this new fact caused him extreme uneasiness, Raskolnikov was in no
hurry for an explanation of it. At times, finding himself in a solitary and remote
part of the town, in some wretched eating-house, sitting alone lost in thought,
hardly knowing how he had come there, he suddenly thought of Svidrigaïlov. He
recognised suddenly, clearly, and with dismay that he ought at once to come to
an understanding with that man and to make what terms he could. Walking
outside the city gates one day, he positively fancied that they had fixed a meeting
there, that he was waiting for Svidrigaïlov. Another time he woke up before
daybreak lying on the ground under some bushes and could not at first
understand how he had come there.