“You could make up your mind for yourself, Lizaveta Ivanovna,” the huckster
was saying aloud. “Come round to-morrow about seven. They will be here too.”
“To-morrow?” said Lizaveta slowly and thoughtfully, as though unable to
make up her mind.
“Upon my word, what a fright you are in of Alyona Ivanovna,” gabbled the
huckster’s wife, a lively little woman. “I look at you, you are like some little
babe. And she is not your own sister either—nothing but a step-sister and what a
hand she keeps over you!”
“But this time don’t say a word to Alyona Ivanovna,” her husband interrupted;
“that’s my advice, but come round to us without asking. It will be worth your
while. Later on your sister herself may have a notion.”
“Am I to come?”
“About seven o’clock to-morrow. And they will be here. You will be able to
decide for yourself.”
“And we’ll have a cup of tea,” added his wife.
“All right, I’ll come,” said Lizaveta, still pondering, and she began slowly
moving away.
Raskolnikov had just passed and heard no more. He passed softly, unnoticed,
trying not to miss a word. His first amazement was followed by a thrill of horror,
like a shiver running down his spine. He had learnt, he had suddenly quite
unexpectedly learnt, that the next day at seven o’clock Lizaveta, the old
woman’s sister and only companion, would be away from home and that
therefore at seven o’clock precisely the old woman would be left alone.
He was only a few steps from his lodging. He went in like a man condemned
to death. He thought of nothing and was incapable of thinking; but he felt
suddenly in his whole being that he had no more freedom of thought, no will,
and that everything was suddenly and irrevocably decided.
Certainly, if he had to wait whole years for a suitable opportunity, he could not
reckon on a more certain step towards the success of the plan than that which
had just presented itself. In any case, it would have been difficult to find out
beforehand and with certainty, with greater exactness and less risk, and without
dangerous inquiries and investigations, that next day at a certain time an old
woman, on whose life an attempt was contemplated, would be at home and
entirely alone. 
