“I believe you. I told you twice. The address has been stamped mechanically
on your memory. You turned this way mechanically and yet precisely according
to the direction, though you are not aware of it. When I told you then, I hardly
hoped you understood me. You give yourself away too much, Rodion
Romanovitch. And another thing, I’m convinced there are lots of people in
Petersburg who talk to themselves as they walk. This is a town of crazy people.
If only we had scientific men, doctors, lawyers and philosophers might make
most valuable investigations in Petersburg each in his own line. There are few
places where there are so many gloomy, strong and queer influences on the soul
of man as in Petersburg. The mere influences of climate mean so much. And it’s
the administrative centre of all Russia and its character must be reflected on the
whole country. But that is neither here nor there now. The point is that I have
several times watched you. You walk out of your house—holding your head high
—twenty paces from home you let it sink, and fold your hands behind your back.
You look and evidently see nothing before nor beside you. At last you begin
moving your lips and talking to yourself, and sometimes you wave one hand and
declaim, and at last stand still in the middle of the road. That’s not at all the
thing. Someone may be watching you besides me, and it won’t do you any good.
It’s nothing really to do with me and I can’t cure you, but, of course, you
understand me.”
“Do you know that I am being followed?” asked Raskolnikov, looking
inquisitively at him.
“No, I know nothing about it,” said Svidrigaïlov, seeming surprised.
“Well, then, let us leave me alone,” Raskolnikov muttered, frowning.
“Very good, let us leave you alone.”
“You had better tell me, if you come here to drink, and directed me twice to
come here to you, why did you hide, and try to get away just now when I looked
at the window from the street? I saw it.”
“He-he! And why was it you lay on your sofa with closed eyes and pretended
to be asleep, though you were wide awake while I stood in your doorway? I saw
it.”
“I may have had... reasons. You know that yourself.”
“And I may have had my reasons, though you don’t know them.”
Raskolnikov dropped his right elbow on the table, leaned his chin in the
fingers of his right hand, and stared intently at Svidrigaïlov. For a full minute he
scrutinised his face, which had impressed him before. It was a strange face, like
a mask; white and red, with bright red lips, with a flaxen beard, and still thick
flaxen hair. His eyes were somehow too blue and their expression somehow too
heavy and fixed. There was something awfully unpleasant in that handsome
face, which looked so wonderfully young for his age. Svidrigaïlov was smartly
dressed in light summer clothes and was particularly dainty in his linen. He wore
a huge ring with a precious stone in it.