“That’s a fetching little girl, Avdotya Romanovna,” remarked Zossimov,
almost licking his lips as they both came out into the street.
“Fetching? You said fetching?” roared Razumihin and he flew at Zossimov
and seized him by the throat. “If you ever dare.... Do you understand? Do you
understand?” he shouted, shaking him by the collar and squeezing him against
the wall. “Do you hear?”
“Let me go, you drunken devil,” said Zossimov, struggling and when he had
let him go, he stared at him and went off into a sudden guffaw. Razumihin stood
facing him in gloomy and earnest reflection.
“Of course, I am an ass,” he observed, sombre as a storm cloud, “but still...
you are another.”
“No, brother, not at all such another. I am not dreaming of any folly.”
They walked along in silence and only when they were close to Raskolnikov’s
lodgings, Razumihin broke the silence in considerable anxiety.
“Listen,” he said, “you’re a first-rate fellow, but among your other failings,
you’re a loose fish, that I know, and a dirty one, too. You are a feeble, nervous
wretch, and a mass of whims, you’re getting fat and lazy and can’t deny yourself
anything—and I call that dirty because it leads one straight into the dirt. You’ve
let yourself get so slack that I don’t know how it is you are still a good, even a
devoted doctor. You—a doctor—sleep on a feather bed and get up at night to
your patients! In another three or four years you won’t get up for your patients...
But hang it all, that’s not the point!... You are going to spend to-night in the
landlady’s flat here. (Hard work I’ve had to persuade her!) And I’ll be in the
kitchen. So here’s a chance for you to get to know her better.... It’s not as you
think! There’s not a trace of anything of the sort, brother...!”
“But I don’t think!”
“Here you have modesty, brother, silence, bashfulness, a savage virtue... and
yet she’s sighing and melting like wax, simply melting! Save me from her, by all
that’s unholy! She’s most prepossessing... I’ll repay you, I’ll do anything....” 
