Raskolnikov was worried that this senseless dream haunted his memory so
miserably, the impression of this feverish delirium persisted so long. The second
week after Easter had come. There were warm bright spring days; in the prison
ward the grating windows under which the sentinel paced were opened. Sonia
had only been able to visit him twice during his illness; each time she had to
obtain permission, and it was difficult. But she often used to come to the hospital
yard, especially in the evening, sometimes only to stand a minute and look up at
the windows of the ward.
One evening, when he was almost well again, Raskolnikov fell asleep. On
waking up he chanced to go to the window, and at once saw Sonia in the
distance at the hospital gate. She seemed to be waiting for someone. Something
stabbed him to the heart at that minute. He shuddered and moved away from the
window. Next day Sonia did not come, nor the day after; he noticed that he was
expecting her uneasily. At last he was discharged. On reaching the prison he
learnt from the convicts that Sofya Semyonovna was lying ill at home and was
unable to go out.
He was very uneasy and sent to inquire after her; he soon learnt that her
illness was not dangerous. Hearing that he was anxious about her, Sonia sent him
a pencilled note, telling him that she was much better, that she had a slight cold
and that she would soon, very soon come and see him at his work. His heart
throbbed painfully as he read it.
Again it was a warm bright day. Early in the morning, at six o’clock, he went
off to work on the river bank, where they used to pound alabaster and where
there was a kiln for baking it in a shed. There were only three of them sent. One
of the convicts went with the guard to the fortress to fetch a tool; the other began
getting the wood ready and laying it in the kiln. Raskolnikov came out of the
shed on to the river bank, sat down on a heap of logs by the shed and began
gazing at the wide deserted river. From the high bank a broad landscape opened
before him, the sound of singing floated faintly audible from the other bank. In
the vast steppe, bathed in sunshine, he could just see, like black specks, the
nomads’ tents.