“I know him! I know him!” he shouted, pushing to the front. “It’s a
government clerk retired from the service, Marmeladov. He lives close by in
Kozel’s house.... Make haste for a doctor! I will pay, see?” He pulled money out
of his pocket and showed it to the policeman. He was in violent agitation.
The police were glad that they had found out who the man was. Raskolnikov
gave his own name and address, and, as earnestly as if it had been his father, he
besought the police to carry the unconscious Marmeladov to his lodging at once.
“Just here, three houses away,” he said eagerly, “the house belongs to Kozel, a
rich German. He was going home, no doubt drunk. I know him, he is a drunkard.
He has a family there, a wife, children, he has one daughter.... It will take time to
take him to the hospital, and there is sure to be a doctor in the house. I’ll pay, I’ll
pay! At least he will be looked after at home... they will help him at once. But
he’ll die before you get him to the hospital.” He managed to slip something
unseen into the policeman’s hand. But the thing was straightforward and
legitimate, and in any case help was closer here. They raised the injured man;
people volunteered to help.
Kozel’s house was thirty yards away. Raskolnikov walked behind, carefully
holding Marmeladov’s head and showing the way.
“This way, this way! We must take him upstairs head foremost. Turn round!
I’ll pay, I’ll make it worth your while,” he muttered.
Katerina Ivanovna had just begun, as she always did at every free moment,
walking to and fro in her little room from window to stove and back again, with
her arms folded across her chest, talking to herself and coughing. Of late she had
begun to talk more than ever to her eldest girl, Polenka, a child of ten, who,
though there was much she did not understand, understood very well that her
mother needed her, and so always watched her with her big clever eyes and
strove her utmost to appear to understand. This time Polenka was undressing her
little brother, who had been unwell all day and was going to bed. The boy was
waiting for her to take off his shirt, which had to be washed at night. He was
sitting straight and motionless on a chair, with a silent, serious face, with his legs
stretched out straight before him—heels together and toes turned out.
He was listening to what his mother was saying to his sister, sitting perfectly
still with pouting lips and wide-open eyes, just as all good little boys have to sit
when they are undressed to go to bed. A little girl, still younger, dressed literally
in rags, stood at the screen, waiting for her turn. The door on to the stairs was
open to relieve them a little from the clouds of tobacco smoke which floated in
from the other rooms and brought on long terrible fits of coughing in the poor,
consumptive woman. Katerina Ivanovna seemed to have grown even thinner
during that week and the hectic flush on her face was brighter than ever. 
