Andrey Semyonovitch had been at home all the morning. The attitude of Pyotr
Petrovitch to this gentleman was strange, though perhaps natural. Pyotr
Petrovitch had despised and hated him from the day he came to stay with him
and at the same time he seemed somewhat afraid of him. He had not come to
stay with him on his arrival in Petersburg simply from parsimony, though that
had been perhaps his chief object. He had heard of Andrey Semyonovitch, who
had once been his ward, as a leading young progressive who was taking an
important part in certain interesting circles, the doings of which were a legend in
the provinces. It had impressed Pyotr Petrovitch. These powerful omniscient
circles who despised everyone and showed everyone up had long inspired in him
a peculiar but quite vague alarm. He had not, of course, been able to form even
an approximate notion of what they meant. He, like everyone, had heard that
there were, especially in Petersburg, progressives of some sort, nihilists and so
on, and, like many people, he exaggerated and distorted the significance of those
words to an absurd degree. What for many years past he had feared more than
anything was being shown up and this was the chief ground for his continual
uneasiness at the thought of transferring his business to Petersburg. He was
afraid of this as little children are sometimes panic-stricken. Some years before,
when he was just entering on his own career, he had come upon two cases in
which rather important personages in the province, patrons of his, had been
cruelly shown up. One instance had ended in great scandal for the person
attacked and the other had very nearly ended in serious trouble. For this reason
Pyotr Petrovitch intended to go into the subject as soon as he reached Petersburg
and, if necessary, to anticipate contingencies by seeking the favour of “our
younger generation.” He relied on Andrey Semyonovitch for this and before his
visit to Raskolnikov he had succeeded in picking up some current phrases. He
soon discovered that Andrey Semyonovitch was a commonplace simpleton, but
that by no means reassured Pyotr Petrovitch. Even if he had been certain that all
the progressives were fools like him, it would not have allayed his uneasiness.
All the doctrines, the ideas, the systems, with which Andrey Semyonovitch
pestered him had no interest for him. He had his own object—he simply wanted
to find out at once what was happening here. Had these people any power or
not? Had he anything to fear from them? Would they expose any enterprise of
his? And what precisely was now the object of their attacks? Could he somehow
make up to them and get round them if they really were powerful? Was this the
thing to do or not? Couldn’t he gain something through them? In fact hundreds
of questions presented themselves.