He heard the hurried footsteps of Razumihin; he closed his eyes and pretended
to be asleep. Razumihin opened the door and stood for some time in the doorway
as though hesitating, then he stepped softly into the room and went cautiously to
the sofa. Raskolnikov heard Nastasya’s whisper:
“Don’t disturb him! Let him sleep. He can have his dinner later.”
“Quite so,” answered Razumihin. Both withdrew carefully and closed the
door. Another half-hour passed. Raskolnikov opened his eyes, turned on his back
again, clasping his hands behind his head.
“Who is he? Who is that man who sprang out of the earth? Where was he,
what did he see? He has seen it all, that’s clear. Where was he then? And from
where did he see? Why has he only now sprung out of the earth? And how could
he see? Is it possible? Hm...” continued Raskolnikov, turning cold and shivering,
“and the jewel case Nikolay found behind the door—was that possible? A clue?
You miss an infinitesimal line and you can build it into a pyramid of evidence! A
fly flew by and saw it! Is it possible?” He felt with sudden loathing how weak,
how physically weak he had become. “I ought to have known it,” he thought
with a bitter smile. “And how dared I, knowing myself, knowing how I should
be, take up an axe and shed blood! I ought to have known beforehand.... Ah, but
I did know!” he whispered in despair. At times he came to a standstill at some
thought.
“No, those men are not made so. The real Master to whom all is permitted
storms Toulon, makes a massacre in Paris, forgets an army in Egypt, wastes half
a million men in the Moscow expedition and gets off with a jest at Vilna. And
altars are set up to him after his death, and so all is permitted. No, such people, it
seems, are not of flesh but of bronze!”
One sudden irrelevant idea almost made him laugh. Napoleon, the pyramids,
Waterloo, and a wretched skinny old woman, a pawnbroker with a red trunk
under her bed—it’s a nice hash for Porfiry Petrovitch to digest! How can they
digest it! It’s too inartistic. “A Napoleon creep under an old woman’s bed! Ugh,
how loathsome!”
At moments he felt he was raving. He sank into a state of feverish excitement.
“The old woman is of no consequence,” he thought, hotly and incoherently. “The
old woman was a mistake perhaps, but she is not what matters! The old woman
was only an illness.... I was in a hurry to overstep.... I didn’t kill a human being,
but a principle! I killed the principle, but I didn’t overstep, I stopped on this
side.... I was only capable of killing. And it seems I wasn’t even capable of that...
Principle? Why was that fool Razumihin abusing the socialists? They are
industrious, commercial people; ‘the happiness of all’ is their case. No, life is
only given to me once and I shall never have it again; I don’t want to wait for
‘the happiness of all.’ I want to live myself, or else better not live at all. I simply
couldn’t pass by my mother starving, keeping my rouble in my pocket while I
waited for the ‘happiness of all.’ I am putting my little brick into the happiness
of all and so my heart is at peace. Ha-ha! Why have you let me slip? I only live
once, I too want.... Ech, I am an æsthetic louse and nothing more,” he added
suddenly, laughing like a madman. “Yes, I am certainly a louse,” he went on,
clutching at the idea, gloating over it and playing with it with vindictive
pleasure. “In the first place, because I can reason that I am one, and secondly,
because for a month past I have been troubling benevolent Providence, calling it
to witness that not for my own fleshly lusts did I undertake it, but with a grand
and noble object—ha-ha! Thirdly, because I aimed at carrying it out as justly as
possible, weighing, measuring and calculating. Of all the lice I picked out the
most useless one and proposed to take from her only as much as I needed for the
first step, no more nor less (so the rest would have gone to a monastery,
according to her will, ha-ha!). And what shows that I am utterly a louse,” he
added, grinding his teeth, “is that I am perhaps viler and more loathsome than
the louse I killed, and I felt beforehand that I should tell myself so after killing
her. Can anything be compared with the horror of that? The vulgarity! The
abjectness! I understand the ‘prophet’ with his sabre, on his steed: Allah
commands and ‘trembling’ creation must obey! The ‘prophet’ is right, he is right
when he sets a battery across the street and blows up the innocent and the guilty
without deigning to explain! It’s for you to obey, trembling creation, and not to
have desires, for that’s not for you!... I shall never, never forgive the old
woman!” 
