They were both silent and the silence lasted strangely long, about ten minutes.
Raskolnikov put his elbow on the table and passed his fingers through his hair.
Porfiry Petrovitch sat quietly waiting. Suddenly Raskolnikov looked scornfully
at Porfiry.
“You are at your old tricks again, Porfiry Petrovitch! Your old method again. I
wonder you don’t get sick of it!”
“Oh, stop that, what does that matter now? It would be a different matter if
there were witnesses present, but we are whispering alone. You see yourself that
I have not come to chase and capture you like a hare. Whether you confess it or
not is nothing to me now; for myself, I am convinced without it.”
“If so, what did you come for?” Raskolnikov asked irritably. “I ask you the
same question again: if you consider me guilty, why don’t you take me to
prison?”
“Oh, that’s your question! I will answer you, point for point. In the first place,
to arrest you so directly is not to my interest.”
“How so? If you are convinced you ought....”
“Ach, what if I am convinced? That’s only my dream for the time. Why
should I put you in safety? You know that’s it, since you ask me to do it. If I
confront you with that workman for instance and you say to him ‘were you
drunk or not? Who saw me with you? I simply took you to be drunk, and you
were drunk, too.’ Well, what could I answer, especially as your story is a more
likely one than his? for there’s nothing but psychology to support his evidence—
that’s almost unseemly with his ugly mug, while you hit the mark exactly, for the
rascal is an inveterate drunkard and notoriously so. And I have myself admitted
candidly several times already that that psychology can be taken in two ways
and that the second way is stronger and looks far more probable, and that apart
from that I have as yet nothing against you. And though I shall put you in prison
and indeed have come—quite contrary to etiquette—to inform you of it
beforehand, yet I tell you frankly, also contrary to etiquette, that it won’t be to
my advantage. Well, secondly, I’ve come to you because...”
“Yes, yes, secondly?” Raskolnikov was listening breathless.
“Because, as I told you just now, I consider I owe you an explanation. I don’t
want you to look upon me as a monster, as I have a genuine liking for you, you
may believe me or not. And in the third place I’ve come to you with a direct and
open proposition—that you should surrender and confess. It will be infinitely
more to your advantage and to my advantage too, for my task will be done. Well,
is this open on my part or not?”