Razumihin waked up next morning at eight o’clock, troubled and serious. He
found himself confronted with many new and unlooked-for perplexities. He had
never expected that he would ever wake up feeling like that. He remembered
every detail of the previous day and he knew that a perfectly novel experience
had befallen him, that he had received an impression unlike anything he had
known before. At the same time he recognised clearly that the dream which had
fired his imagination was hopelessly unattainable—so unattainable that he felt
positively ashamed of it, and he hastened to pass to the other more practical
cares and difficulties bequeathed him by that “thrice accursed yesterday.”
The most awful recollection of the previous day was the way he had shown
himself “base and mean,” not only because he had been drunk, but because he
had taken advantage of the young girl’s position to abuse her fiancé in his stupid
jealousy, knowing nothing of their mutual relations and obligations and next to
nothing of the man himself. And what right had he to criticise him in that hasty
and unguarded manner? Who had asked for his opinion? Was it thinkable that
such a creature as Avdotya Romanovna would be marrying an unworthy man for
money? So there must be something in him. The lodgings? But after all how
could he know the character of the lodgings? He was furnishing a flat... Foo!
how despicable it all was! And what justification was it that he was drunk? Such
a stupid excuse was even more degrading! In wine is truth, and the truth had all
come out, “that is, all the uncleanness of his coarse and envious heart”! And
would such a dream ever be permissible to him, Razumihin? What was he beside
such a girl—he, the drunken noisy braggart of last night? Was it possible to
imagine so absurd and cynical a juxtaposition? Razumihin blushed desperately at
the very idea and suddenly the recollection forced itself vividly upon him of how
he had said last night on the stairs that the landlady would be jealous of Avdotya
Romanovna... that was simply intolerable. He brought his fist down heavily on
the kitchen stove, hurt his hand and sent one of the bricks flying.
“Of course,” he muttered to himself a minute later with a feeling of selfabasement, “of course, all these infamies can never be wiped out or smoothed
over... and so it’s useless even to think of it, and I must go to them in silence and
do my duty... in silence, too... and not ask forgiveness, and say nothing... for all
is lost now!” 
