“What!” cried Katerina Ivanovna, suddenly realising the position, and she
rushed at Luzhin. “What! You accuse her of stealing? Sonia? Ah, the wretches,
the wretches!”
And running to Sonia she flung her wasted arms round her and held her as in a
vise.
“Sonia! how dared you take ten roubles from him? Foolish girl! Give it to me!
Give me the ten roubles at once—here!”
And snatching the note from Sonia, Katerina Ivanovna crumpled it up and
flung it straight into Luzhin’s face. It hit him in the eye and fell on the ground.
Amalia Ivanovna hastened to pick it up. Pyotr Petrovitch lost his temper.
“Hold that mad woman!” he shouted.
At that moment several other persons, besides Lebeziatnikov, appeared in the
doorway, among them the two ladies.
“What! Mad? Am I mad? Idiot!” shrieked Katerina Ivanovna. “You are an
idiot yourself, pettifogging lawyer, base man! Sonia, Sonia take his money!
Sonia a thief! Why, she’d give away her last penny!” and Katerina Ivanovna
broke into hysterical laughter. “Did you ever see such an idiot?” she turned from
side to side. “And you too?” she suddenly saw the landlady, “and you too,
sausage eater, you declare that she is a thief, you trashy Prussian hen’s leg in a
crinoline! She hasn’t been out of this room: she came straight from you, you
wretch, and sat down beside me, everyone saw her. She sat here, by Rodion
Romanovitch. Search her! Since she’s not left the room, the money would have
to be on her! Search her, search her! But if you don’t find it, then excuse me, my
dear fellow, you’ll answer for it! I’ll go to our Sovereign, to our Sovereign, to
our gracious Tsar himself, and throw myself at his feet, to-day, this minute! I am
alone in the world! They would let me in! Do you think they wouldn’t? You’re
wrong, I will get in! I will get in! You reckoned on her meekness! You relied
upon that! But I am not so submissive, let me tell you! You’ve gone too far
yourself. Search her, search her!”
And Katerina Ivanovna in a frenzy shook Luzhin and dragged him towards
Sonia.
“I am ready, I’ll be responsible... but calm yourself, madam, calm yourself. I
see that you are not so submissive!... Well, well, but as to that...” Luzhin
muttered, “that ought to be before the police... though indeed there are witnesses
enough as it is.... I am ready.... But in any case it’s difficult for a man... on
account of her sex.... But with the help of Amalia Ivanovna... though, of course,
it’s not the way to do things.... How is it to be done?”