And in the end the criminal was, in consideration of extenuating
circumstances, condemned to penal servitude in the second class for a term of
eight years only.
At the very beginning of the trial Raskolnikov’s mother fell ill. Dounia and
Razumihin found it possible to get her out of Petersburg during the trial.
Razumihin chose a town on the railway not far from Petersburg, so as to be able
to follow every step of the trial and at the same time to see Avdotya Romanovna
as often as possible. Pulcheria Alexandrovna’s illness was a strange nervous one
and was accompanied by a partial derangement of her intellect.
When Dounia returned from her last interview with her brother, she had found
her mother already ill, in feverish delirium. That evening Razumihin and she
agreed what answers they must make to her mother’s questions about
Raskolnikov and made up a complete story for her mother’s benefit of his having
to go away to a distant part of Russia on a business commission, which would
bring him in the end money and reputation.
But they were struck by the fact that Pulcheria Alexandrovna never asked
them anything on the subject, neither then nor thereafter. On the contrary, she
had her own version of her son’s sudden departure; she told them with tears how
he had come to say good-bye to her, hinting that she alone knew many
mysterious and important facts, and that Rodya had many very powerful
enemies, so that it was necessary for him to be in hiding. As for his future career,
she had no doubt that it would be brilliant when certain sinister influences could
be removed. She assured Razumihin that her son would be one day a great
statesman, that his article and brilliant literary talent proved it. This article she
was continually reading, she even read it aloud, almost took it to bed with her,
but scarcely asked where Rodya was, though the subject was obviously avoided
by the others, which might have been enough to awaken her suspicions.
They began to be frightened at last at Pulcheria Alexandrovna’s strange
silence on certain subjects. She did not, for instance, complain of getting no
letters from him, though in previous years she had only lived on the hope of
letters from her beloved Rodya. This was the cause of great uneasiness to
Dounia; the idea occurred to her that her mother suspected that there was
something terrible in her son’s fate and was afraid to ask, for fear of hearing
something still more awful. In any case, Dounia saw clearly that her mother was
not in full possession of her faculties.