Two months later Dounia was married to Razumihin. It was a quiet and
sorrowful wedding; Porfiry Petrovitch and Zossimov were invited however.
During all this period Razumihin wore an air of resolute determination. Dounia
put implicit faith in his carrying out his plans and indeed she could not but
believe in him. He displayed a rare strength of will. Among other things he
began attending university lectures again in order to take his degree. They were
continually making plans for the future; both counted on settling in Siberia
within five years at least. Till then they rested their hopes on Sonia.
Pulcheria Alexandrovna was delighted to give her blessing to Dounia’s
marriage with Razumihin; but after the marriage she became even more
melancholy and anxious. To give her pleasure Razumihin told her how
Raskolnikov had looked after the poor student and his decrepit father and how a
year ago he had been burnt and injured in rescuing two little children from a fire.
These two pieces of news excited Pulcheria Alexandrovna’s disordered
imagination almost to ecstasy. She was continually talking about them, even
entering into conversation with strangers in the street, though Dounia always
accompanied her. In public conveyances and shops, wherever she could capture
a listener, she would begin the discourse about her son, his article, how he had
helped the student, how he had been burnt at the fire, and so on! Dounia did not
know how to restrain her. Apart from the danger of her morbid excitement, there
was the risk of someone’s recalling Raskolnikov’s name and speaking of the
recent trial. Pulcheria Alexandrovna found out the address of the mother of the
two children her son had saved and insisted on going to see her.
At last her restlessness reached an extreme point. She would sometimes begin
to cry suddenly and was often ill and feverishly delirious. One morning she
declared that by her reckoning Rodya ought soon to be home, that she
remembered when he said good-bye to her he said that they must expect him
back in nine months. She began to prepare for his coming, began to do up her
room for him, to clean the furniture, to wash and put up new hangings and so on.
Dounia was anxious, but said nothing and helped her to arrange the room. After
a fatiguing day spent in continual fancies, in joyful day-dreams and tears,
Pulcheria Alexandrovna was taken ill in the night and by morning she was
feverish and delirious. It was brain fever. She died within a fortnight. In her
delirium she dropped words which showed that she knew a great deal more
about her son’s terrible fate than they had supposed.