“Oh hush, hush,” cried Sonia, clasping her hands. “You turned away from God
and God has smitten you, has given you over to the devil!”
“Then Sonia, when I used to lie there in the dark and all this became clear to
me, was it a temptation of the devil, eh?”
“Hush, don’t laugh, blasphemer! You don’t understand, you don’t understand!
Oh God! He won’t understand!”
“Hush, Sonia! I am not laughing. I know myself that it was the devil leading
me. Hush, Sonia, hush!” he repeated with gloomy insistence. “I know it all, I
have thought it all over and over and whispered it all over to myself, lying there
in the dark.... I’ve argued it all over with myself, every point of it, and I know it
all, all! And how sick, how sick I was then of going over it all! I have kept
wanting to forget it and make a new beginning, Sonia, and leave off thinking.
And you don’t suppose that I went into it headlong like a fool? I went into it like
a wise man, and that was just my destruction. And you mustn’t suppose that I
didn’t know, for instance, that if I began to question myself whether I had the
right to gain power—I certainly hadn’t the right—or that if I asked myself
whether a human being is a louse it proved that it wasn’t so for me, though it
might be for a man who would go straight to his goal without asking questions....
If I worried myself all those days, wondering whether Napoleon would have
done it or not, I felt clearly of course that I wasn’t Napoleon. I had to endure all
the agony of that battle of ideas, Sonia, and I longed to throw it off: I wanted to
murder without casuistry, to murder for my own sake, for myself alone! I didn’t
want to lie about it even to myself. It wasn’t to help my mother I did the murder
—that’s nonsense—I didn’t do the murder to gain wealth and power and to
become a benefactor of mankind. Nonsense! I simply did it; I did the murder for
myself, for myself alone, and whether I became a benefactor to others, or spent
my life like a spider catching men in my web and sucking the life out of men, I
couldn’t have cared at that moment.... And it was not the money I wanted, Sonia,
when I did it. It was not so much the money I wanted, but something else.... I
know it all now.... Understand me! Perhaps I should never have committed a
murder again. I wanted to find out something else; it was something else led me
on. I wanted to find out then and quickly whether I was a louse like everybody
else or a man. Whether I can step over barriers or not, whether I dare stoop to
pick up or not, whether I am a trembling creature or whether I have the right...”