When we quarrelled, I usually held my tongue and did
not irritate her and that gentlemanly conduct rarely failed to attain its object, it
influenced her, it pleased her, indeed. These were times when she was positively
proud of me. But your sister she couldn’t put up with, anyway. And however she
came to risk taking such a beautiful creature into her house as a governess. My
explanation is that Marfa Petrovna was an ardent and impressionable woman and
simply fell in love herself—literally fell in love—with your sister. Well, little
wonder—look at Avdotya Romanovna! I saw the danger at the first glance and
what do you think, I resolved not to look at her even. But Avdotya Romanovna
herself made the first step, would you believe it? Would you believe it too that
Marfa Petrovna was positively angry with me at first for my persistent silence
about your sister, for my careless reception of her continual adoring praises of
Avdotya Romanovna. I don’t know what it was she wanted! Well, of course,
Marfa Petrovna told Avdotya Romanovna every detail about me. She had the
unfortunate habit of telling literally everyone all our family secrets and
continually complaining of me; how could she fail to confide in such a delightful
new friend? I expect they talked of nothing else but me and no doubt Avdotya
Romanovna heard all those dark mysterious rumours that were current about
me.... I don’t mind betting that you too have heard something of the sort
already?”
“I have. Luzhin charged you with having caused the death of a child. Is that
true?”
“Don’t refer to those vulgar tales, I beg,” said Svidrigaïlov with disgust and
annoyance. “If you insist on wanting to know about all that idiocy, I will tell you
one day, but now...”
“I was told too about some footman of yours in the country whom you treated
badly.”
“I beg you to drop the subject,” Svidrigaïlov interrupted again with obvious
impatience.
“Was that the footman who came to you after death to fill your pipe?... you
told me about it yourself.” Raskolnikov felt more and more irritated.
Svidrigaïlov looked at him attentively and Raskolnikov fancied he caught a
flash of spiteful mockery in that look. But Svidrigaïlov restrained himself and
answered very civilly.