“You keep on laughing and very inappropriately, allow me to tell you. You
don’t understand! There is no such rôle in a community. The community is
established that there should be no such rôles. In a community, such a rôle is
essentially transformed and what is stupid here is sensible there, what, under
present conditions, is unnatural becomes perfectly natural in the community. It
all depends on the environment. It’s all the environment and man himself is
nothing. And I am on good terms with Sofya Semyonovna to this day, which is a
proof that she never regarded me as having wronged her. I am trying now to
attract her to the community, but on quite, quite a different footing. What are you
laughing at? We are trying to establish a community of our own, a special one,
on a broader basis. We have gone further in our convictions. We reject more!
And meanwhile I’m still developing Sofya Semyonovna. She has a beautiful,
beautiful character!”
“And you take advantage of her fine character, eh? He-he!”
“No, no! Oh, no! On the contrary.”
“Oh, on the contrary! He-he-he! A queer thing to say!”
“Believe me! Why should I disguise it? In fact, I feel it strange myself how
timid, chaste and modern she is with me!”
“And you, of course, are developing her... he-he! trying to prove to her that all
that modesty is nonsense?”
“Not at all, not at all! How coarsely, how stupidly—excuse me saying so—
you misunderstand the word development! Good heavens, how... crude you still
are! We are striving for the freedom of women and you have only one idea in
your head.... Setting aside the general question of chastity and feminine modesty
as useless in themselves and indeed prejudices, I fully accept her chastity with
me, because that’s for her to decide. Of course if she were to tell me herself that
she wanted me, I should think myself very lucky, because I like the girl very
much; but as it is, no one has ever treated her more courteously than I, with more
respect for her dignity... I wait in hopes, that’s all!”
“You had much better make her a present of something. I bet you never
thought of that.”