Then he went out, and turned into the square. Again an intense, almost
unbearable joy overwhelmed him for an instant, as it had in the police-office. “I
have buried my tracks! And who, who can think of looking under that stone? It
has been lying there most likely ever since the house was built, and will lie as
many years more. And if it were found, who would think of me? It is all over!
No clue!” And he laughed. Yes, he remembered that he began laughing a thin,
nervous noiseless laugh, and went on laughing all the time he was crossing the
square. But when he reached the K—— Boulevard where two days before he
had come upon that girl, his laughter suddenly ceased. Other ideas crept into his
mind. He felt all at once that it would be loathsome to pass that seat on which
after the girl was gone, he had sat and pondered, and that it would be hateful,
too, to meet that whiskered policeman to whom he had given the twenty
copecks: “Damn him!”
He walked, looking about him angrily and distractedly. All his ideas now
seemed to be circling round some single point, and he felt that there really was
such a point, and that now, now, he was left facing that point—and for the first
time, indeed, during the last two months.
“Damn it all!” he thought suddenly, in a fit of ungovernable fury. “If it has
begun, then it has begun. Hang the new life! Good Lord, how stupid it is!... And
what lies I told to-day! How despicably I fawned upon that wretched Ilya
Petrovitch! But that is all folly! What do I care for them all, and my fawning
upon them! It is not that at all! It is not that at all!”
Suddenly he stopped; a new utterly unexpected and exceedingly simple
question perplexed and bitterly confounded him.
“If it all has really been done deliberately and not idiotically, if I really had a
certain and definite object, how is it I did not even glance into the purse and
don’t know what I had there, for which I have undergone these agonies, and
have deliberately undertaken this base, filthy degrading business? And here I
wanted at once to throw into the water the purse together with all the things
which I had not seen either... how’s that?”
Yes, that was so, that was all so. Yet he had known it all before, and it was not
a new question for him, even when it was decided in the night without hesitation
and consideration, as though so it must be, as though it could not possibly be
otherwise.... Yes, he had known it all, and understood it all; it surely had all been
settled even yesterday at the moment when he was bending over the box and
pulling the jewel-cases out of it.... Yes, so it was.
 
