Shouts of laughter and even oaths followed. The laughter and the oaths came
from those who were listening and also from those who had heard nothing but
were simply looking at the figure of the discharged government clerk.
“To be pitied! Why am I to be pitied?” Marmeladov suddenly declaimed,
standing up with his arm outstretched, as though he had been only waiting for
that question.
“Why am I to be pitied, you say? Yes! there’s nothing to pity me for! I ought
to be crucified, crucified on a cross, not pitied! Crucify me, oh judge, crucify me
but pity me! And then I will go of myself to be crucified, for it’s not merrymaking I seek but tears and tribulation!... Do you suppose, you that sell, that this
pint of yours has been sweet to me? It was tribulation I sought at the bottom of
it, tears and tribulation, and have found it, and I have tasted it; but He will pity
us Who has had pity on all men, Who has understood all men and all things, He
is the One, He too is the judge. He will come in that day and He will ask: ‘Where
is the daughter who gave herself for her cross, consumptive step-mother and for
the little children of another? Where is the daughter who had pity upon the filthy
drunkard, her earthly father, undismayed by his beastliness?’ And He will say,
‘Come to me! I have already forgiven thee once.... I have forgiven thee once....
Thy sins which are many are forgiven thee for thou hast loved much....’ And he
will forgive my Sonia, He will forgive, I know it... I felt it in my heart when I
was with her just now! And He will judge and will forgive all, the good and the
evil, the wise and the meek.... And when He has done with all of them, then He
will summon us. ‘You too come forth,’ He will say, ‘Come forth ye drunkards,
come forth, ye weak ones, come forth, ye children of shame!’ And we shall all
come forth, without shame and shall stand before him. And He will say unto us,
‘Ye are swine, made in the Image of the Beast and with his mark; but come ye
also!’ And the wise ones and those of understanding will say, ‘Oh Lord, why
dost Thou receive these men?’ And He will say, ‘This is why I receive them, oh
ye wise, this is why I receive them, oh ye of understanding, that not one of them
believed himself to be worthy of this.’ And He will hold out His hands to us and
we shall fall down before him... and we shall weep... and we shall understand all
things! Then we shall understand all!... and all will understand, Katerina
Ivanovna even... she will understand.... Lord, Thy kingdom come!” And he sank
down on the bench exhausted, and helpless, looking at no one, apparently
oblivious of his surroundings and plunged in deep thought. His words had
created a certain impression; there was a moment of silence; but soon laughter
and oaths were heard again.
 
