He waked up late next day after a broken sleep. But his sleep had not
refreshed him; he waked up bilious, irritable, ill-tempered, and looked with
hatred at his room. It was a tiny cupboard of a room about six paces in length. It
had a poverty-stricken appearance with its dusty yellow paper peeling off the
walls, and it was so low-pitched that a man of more than average height was ill
at ease in it and felt every moment that he would knock his head against the
ceiling. The furniture was in keeping with the room: there were three old chairs,
rather rickety; a painted table in the corner on which lay a few manuscripts and
books; the dust that lay thick upon them showed that they had been long
untouched. A big clumsy sofa occupied almost the whole of one wall and half
the floor space of the room; it was once covered with chintz, but was now in rags
and served Raskolnikov as a bed. Often he went to sleep on it, as he was,
without undressing, without sheets, wrapped in his old student’s overcoat, with
his head on one little pillow, under which he heaped up all the linen he had,
clean and dirty, by way of a bolster. A little table stood in front of the sofa.
It would have been difficult to sink to a lower ebb of disorder, but to
Raskolnikov in his present state of mind this was positively agreeable. He had
got completely away from everyone, like a tortoise in its shell, and even the sight
of a servant girl who had to wait upon him and looked sometimes into his room
made him writhe with nervous irritation. He was in the condition that overtakes
some monomaniacs entirely concentrated upon one thing. His landlady had for
the last fortnight given up sending him in meals, and he had not yet thought of
expostulating with her, though he went without his dinner. Nastasya, the cook
and only servant, was rather pleased at the lodger’s mood and had entirely given
up sweeping and doing his room, only once a week or so she would stray into his
room with a broom. She waked him up that day.
“Get up, why are you asleep?” she called to him. “It’s past nine, I have
brought you some tea; will you have a cup? I should think you’re fairly
starving?”
Raskolnikov opened his eyes, started and recognised Nastasya.
“From the landlady, eh?” he asked, slowly and with a sickly face sitting up on
the sofa.
“From the landlady, indeed!” 
