The room was dark. He was lying on the bed and wrapped up in the blanket as
before. The wind was howling under the window. “How disgusting,” he thought
with annoyance.
He got up and sat on the edge of the bedstead with his back to the window.
“It’s better not to sleep at all,” he decided. There was a cold damp draught from
the window, however; without getting up he drew the blanket over him and
wrapped himself in it. He was not thinking of anything and did not want to think.
But one image rose after another, incoherent scraps of thought without beginning
or end passed through his mind. He sank into drowsiness. Perhaps the cold, or
the dampness, or the dark, or the wind that howled under the window and tossed
the trees roused a sort of persistent craving for the fantastic. He kept dwelling on
images of flowers, he fancied a charming flower garden, a bright, warm, almost
hot day, a holiday—Trinity day. A fine, sumptuous country cottage in the
English taste overgrown with fragrant flowers, with flower beds going round the
house; the porch, wreathed in climbers, was surrounded with beds of roses. A
light, cool staircase, carpeted with rich rugs, was decorated with rare plants in
china pots. He noticed particularly in the windows nosegays of tender, white,
heavily fragrant narcissus bending over their bright, green, thick long stalks. He
was reluctant to move away from them, but he went up the stairs and came into a
large, high drawing-room and again everywhere—at the windows, the doors on
to the balcony, and on the balcony itself—were flowers. The floors were strewn
with freshly-cut fragrant hay, the windows were open, a fresh, cool, light air
came into the room. The birds were chirruping under the window, and in the
middle of the room, on a table covered with a white satin shroud, stood a coffin.
The coffin was covered with white silk and edged with a thick white frill;
wreaths of flowers surrounded it on all sides. Among the flowers lay a girl in a
white muslin dress, with her arms crossed and pressed on her bosom, as though
carved out of marble. But her loose fair hair was wet; there was a wreath of roses
on her head. The stern and already rigid profile of her face looked as though
chiselled of marble too, and the smile on her pale lips was full of an immense
unchildish misery and sorrowful appeal. Svidrigaïlov knew that girl; there was
no holy image, no burning candle beside the coffin; no sound of prayers: the girl
had drowned herself. She was only fourteen, but her heart was broken. And she
had destroyed herself, crushed by an insult that had appalled and amazed that
childish soul, had smirched that angel purity with unmerited disgrace and torn
from her a last scream of despair, unheeded and brutally disregarded, on a dark
night in the cold and wet while the wind howled....