“Yes, she is. For she is credulous and good-hearted, and she believes
everything from the goodness of her heart and... and... and she is like that... yes...
You must excuse her,” said Sonia, and again she got up to go.
“But you haven’t heard what I have to say.”
“No, I haven’t heard,” muttered Sonia.
“Then sit down.” She was terribly confused; she sat down again a third time.
“Seeing her position with her unfortunate little ones, I should be glad, as I
have said before, so far as lies in my power, to be of service, that is, so far as is
in my power, not more. One might for instance get up a subscription for her, or a
lottery, something of the sort, such as is always arranged in such cases by friends
or even outsiders desirous of assisting people. It was of that I intended to speak
to you; it might be done.”
“Yes, yes... God will repay you for it,” faltered Sonia, gazing intently at Pyotr
Petrovitch.
“It might be, but we will talk of it later. We might begin it to-day, we will talk
it over this evening and lay the foundation so to speak. Come to me at seven
o’clock. Mr. Lebeziatnikov, I hope, will assist us. But there is one circumstance
of which I ought to warn you beforehand and for which I venture to trouble you,
Sofya Semyonovna, to come here. In my opinion money cannot be, indeed it’s
unsafe to put it into Katerina Ivanovna’s own hands. The dinner to-day is a proof
of that. Though she has not, so to speak, a crust of bread for to-morrow and...
well, boots or shoes, or anything; she has bought to-day Jamaica rum, and even,
I believe, Madeira and... and coffee. I saw it as I passed through. To-morrow it
will all fall upon you again, they won’t have a crust of bread. It’s absurd, really,
and so, to my thinking, a subscription ought to be raised so that the unhappy
widow should not know of the money, but only you, for instance. Am I right?”
“I don’t know... this is only to-day, once in her life.... She was so anxious to
do honour, to celebrate the memory.... And she is very sensible... but just as you
think and I shall be very, very... they will all be... and God will reward... and the
orphans...”
Sonia burst into tears.
“Very well, then, keep it in mind; and now will you accept for the benefit of
your relation the small sum that I am able to spare, from me personally. I am
very anxious that my name should not be mentioned in connection with it.
Here... having so to speak anxieties of my own, I cannot do more...”
And Pyotr Petrovitch held out to Sonia a ten-rouble note carefully unfolded.
Sonia took it, flushed crimson, jumped up, muttered something and began taking
leave. Pyotr Petrovitch accompanied her ceremoniously to the door. She got out
of the room at last, agitated and distressed, and returned to Katerina Ivanovna,
overwhelmed with confusion.