“Now, why need you have come? Your laughter, too, as you came in, do you
remember? I saw it all plain as daylight, but if I hadn’t expected you so specially,
I should not have noticed anything in your laughter. You see what influence a
mood has! Mr. Razumihin then—ah, that stone, that stone under which the
things were hidden! I seem to see it somewhere in a kitchen garden. It was in a
kitchen garden, you told Zametov and afterwards you repeated that in my office?
And when we began picking your article to pieces, how you explained it! One
could take every word of yours in two senses, as though there were another
meaning hidden.
“So in this way, Rodion Romanovitch, I reached the furthest limit, and
knocking my head against a post, I pulled myself up, asking myself what I was
about. After all, I said, you can take it all in another sense if you like, and it’s
more natural so, indeed. I couldn’t help admitting it was more natural. I was
bothered! ‘No, I’d better get hold of some little fact’ I said. So when I heard of
the bell-ringing, I held my breath and was all in a tremor. ‘Here is my little fact,’
thought I, and I didn’t think it over, I simply wouldn’t. I would have given a
thousand roubles at that minute to have seen you with my own eyes, when you
walked a hundred paces beside that workman, after he had called you murderer
to your face, and you did not dare to ask him a question all the way. And then
what about your trembling, what about your bell-ringing in your illness, in semidelirium?
“And so, Rodion Romanovitch, can you wonder that I played such pranks on
you? And what made you come at that very minute? Someone seemed to have
sent you, by Jove! And if Nikolay had not parted us... and do you remember
Nikolay at the time? Do you remember him clearly? It was a thunderbolt, a
regular thunderbolt! And how I met him! I didn’t believe in the thunderbolt, not
for a minute. You could see it for yourself; and how could I? Even afterwards,
when you had gone and he began making very, very plausible answers on certain
points, so that I was surprised at him myself, even then I didn’t believe his story!
You see what it is to be as firm as a rock! No, thought I, Morgenfrüh. What has
Nikolay got to do with it!”
“Razumihin told me just now that you think Nikolay guilty and had yourself
assured him of it....”