“Well, when one has no one, nowhere else one can go! For every man must
have somewhere to go. Since there are times when one absolutely must go
somewhere! When my own daughter first went out with a yellow ticket, then I
had to go... (for my daughter has a yellow passport),” he added in parenthesis,
looking with a certain uneasiness at the young man. “No matter, sir, no matter!”
he went on hurriedly and with apparent composure when both the boys at the
counter guffawed and even the innkeeper smiled—“No matter, I am not
confounded by the wagging of their heads; for everyone knows everything about
it already, and all that is secret is made open. And I accept it all, not with
contempt, but with humility. So be it! So be it! ‘Behold the man!’ Excuse me,
young man, can you.... No, to put it more strongly and more distinctly; not can
you but dare you, looking upon me, assert that I am not a pig?”
The young man did not answer a word.
“Well,” the orator began again stolidly and with even increased dignity, after
waiting for the laughter in the room to subside. “Well, so be it, I am a pig, but
she is a lady! I have the semblance of a beast, but Katerina Ivanovna, my spouse,
is a person of education and an officer’s daughter. Granted, granted, I am a
scoundrel, but she is a woman of a noble heart, full of sentiments, refined by
education. And yet... oh, if only she felt for me! Honoured sir, honoured sir, you
know every man ought to have at least one place where people feel for him! But
Katerina Ivanovna, though she is magnanimous, she is unjust.... And yet,
although I realise that when she pulls my hair she only does it out of pity—for I
repeat without being ashamed, she pulls my hair, young man,” he declared with
redoubled dignity, hearing the sniggering again—“but, my God, if she would but
once.... But no, no! It’s all in vain and it’s no use talking! No use talking! For
more than once, my wish did come true and more than once she has felt for me
but... such is my fate and I am a beast by nature!”
“Rather!” assented the innkeeper yawning. Marmeladov struck his fist
resolutely on the table.
 
