He was ill a long time. But it was not the horrors of prison life, not the hard
labour, the bad food, the shaven head, or the patched clothes that crushed him.
What did he care for all those trials and hardships! he was even glad of the hard
work. Physically exhausted, he could at least reckon on a few hours of quiet
sleep. And what was the food to him—the thin cabbage soup with beetles
floating in it? In the past as a student he had often not had even that. His clothes
were warm and suited to his manner of life. He did not even feel the fetters. Was
he ashamed of his shaven head and parti-coloured coat? Before whom? Before
Sonia? Sonia was afraid of him, how could he be ashamed before her? And yet
he was ashamed even before Sonia, whom he tortured because of it with his
contemptuous rough manner. But it was not his shaven head and his fetters he
was ashamed of: his pride had been stung to the quick. It was wounded pride that
made him ill. Oh, how happy he would have been if he could have blamed
himself! He could have borne anything then, even shame and disgrace. But he
judged himself severely, and his exasperated conscience found no particularly
terrible fault in his past, except a simple blunder which might happen to anyone.
He was ashamed just because he, Raskolnikov, had so hopelessly, stupidly come
to grief through some decree of blind fate, and must humble himself and submit
to “the idiocy” of a sentence, if he were anyhow to be at peace.
Vague and objectless anxiety in the present, and in the future a continual
sacrifice leading to nothing—that was all that lay before him. And what comfort
was it to him that at the end of eight years he would only be thirty-two and able
to begin a new life! What had he to live for? What had he to look forward to?
Why should he strive? To live in order to exist? Why, he had been ready a
thousand times before to give up existence for the sake of an idea, for a hope,
even for a fancy. Mere existence had always been too little for him; he had
always wanted more. Perhaps it was just because of the strength of his desires
that he had thought himself a man to whom more was permissible than to others.