He stood still, thought a moment, and a suffering smile came for a moment on
to his lips.
“To-day! To-day,” he repeated to himself. “Yes, to-day! So it must be....”
But as he was about to open the door, it began opening of itself. He started and
moved back. The door opened gently and slowly, and there suddenly appeared a
figure—yesterday’s visitor from underground.
The man stood in the doorway, looked at Raskolnikov without speaking, and
took a step forward into the room. He was exactly the same as yesterday; the
same figure, the same dress, but there was a great change in his face; he looked
dejected and sighed deeply. If he had only put his hand up to his cheek and
leaned his head on one side he would have looked exactly like a peasant woman.
“What do you want?” asked Raskolnikov, numb with terror. The man was still
silent, but suddenly he bowed down almost to the ground, touching it with his
finger.
“What is it?” cried Raskolnikov.
“I have sinned,” the man articulated softly.
“How?”
“By evil thoughts.”
They looked at one another.
“I was vexed. When you came, perhaps in drink, and bade the porters go to
the police station and asked about the blood, I was vexed that they let you go and
took you for drunken. I was so vexed that I lost my sleep. And remembering the
address we came here yesterday and asked for you....”
“Who came?” Raskolnikov interrupted, instantly beginning to recollect.
“I did, I’ve wronged you.”
“Then you come from that house?”
“I was standing at the gate with them... don’t you remember? We have carried
on our trade in that house for years past. We cure and prepare hides, we take
work home... most of all I was vexed....”
And the whole scene of the day before yesterday in the gateway came clearly
before Raskolnikov’s mind; he recollected that there had been several people
there besides the porters, women among them. He remembered one voice had
suggested taking him straight to the police-station. He could not recall the face
of the speaker, and even now he did not recognise it, but he remembered that he
had turned round and made him some answer....