But during the two or three days after Katerina Ivanovna’s death, he had two
or three times met Svidrigaïlov at Sonia’s lodging, where he had gone aimlessly
for a moment. They exchanged a few words and made no reference to the vital
subject, as though they were tacitly agreed not to speak of it for a time.
Katerina Ivanovna’s body was still lying in the coffin, Svidrigaïlov was busy
making arrangements for the funeral. Sonia too was very busy. At their last
meeting Svidrigaïlov informed Raskolnikov that he had made an arrangement,
and a very satisfactory one, for Katerina Ivanovna’s children; that he had,
through certain connections, succeeded in getting hold of certain personages by
whose help the three orphans could be at once placed in very suitable
institutions; that the money he had settled on them had been of great assistance,
as it is much easier to place orphans with some property than destitute ones. He
said something too about Sonia and promised to come himself in a day or two to
see Raskolnikov, mentioning that “he would like to consult with him, that there
were things they must talk over....”
This conversation took place in the passage on the stairs. Svidrigaïlov looked
intently at Raskolnikov and suddenly, after a brief pause, dropping his voice,
asked: “But how is it, Rodion Romanovitch; you don’t seem yourself? You look
and you listen, but you don’t seem to understand. Cheer up! We’ll talk things
over; I am only sorry, I’ve so much to do of my own business and other people’s.
Ah, Rodion Romanovitch,” he added suddenly, “what all men need is fresh air,
fresh air... more than anything!”
He moved to one side to make way for the priest and server, who were coming
up the stairs. They had come for the requiem service. By Svidrigaïlov’s orders it
was sung twice a day punctually. Svidrigaïlov went his way. Raskolnikov stood
still a moment, thought, and followed the priest into Sonia’s room. He stood at
the door. They began quietly, slowly and mournfully singing the service. From
his childhood the thought of death and the presence of death had something
oppressive and mysteriously awful; and it was long since he had heard the
requiem service. And there was something else here as well, too awful and
disturbing. He looked at the children: they were all kneeling by the coffin;
Polenka was weeping. Behind them Sonia prayed, softly and, as it were, timidly
weeping.