“Sonia, I have a bad heart, take note of that. It may explain a great deal. I have
come because I am bad. There are men who wouldn’t have come. But I am a
coward and... a mean wretch. But... never mind! That’s not the point. I must
speak now, but I don’t know how to begin.”
He paused and sank into thought.
“Ach, we are so different,” he cried again, “we are not alike. And why, why
did I come? I shall never forgive myself that.”
“No, no, it was a good thing you came,” cried Sonia. “It’s better I should
know, far better!”
He looked at her with anguish.
“What if it were really that?” he said, as though reaching a conclusion. “Yes,
that’s what it was! I wanted to become a Napoleon, that is why I killed her.... Do
you understand now?”
“N-no,” Sonia whispered naïvely and timidly. “Only speak, speak, I shall
understand, I shall understand in myself!” she kept begging him.
“You’ll understand? Very well, we shall see!” He paused and was for some
time lost in meditation.
“It was like this: I asked myself one day this question—what if Napoleon, for
instance, had happened to be in my place, and if he had not had Toulon nor
Egypt nor the passage of Mont Blanc to begin his career with, but instead of all
those picturesque and monumental things, there had simply been some
ridiculous old hag, a pawnbroker, who had to be murdered too to get money
from her trunk (for his career, you understand). Well, would he have brought
himself to that if there had been no other means? Wouldn’t he have felt a pang at
its being so far from monumental and... and sinful, too? Well, I must tell you that
I worried myself fearfully over that ‘question’ so that I was awfully ashamed
when I guessed at last (all of a sudden, somehow) that it would not have given
him the least pang, that it would not even have struck him that it was not
monumental... that he would not have seen that there was anything in it to pause
over, and that, if he had had no other way, he would have strangled her in a
minute without thinking about it! Well, I too... left off thinking about it...
murdered her, following his example. And that’s exactly how it was! Do you
think it funny? Yes, Sonia, the funniest thing of all is that perhaps that’s just how
it was.”