“Why are you lying like a log?” she shouted, looking at him with repulsion.
He got up, and sat down again, but said nothing and stared at the floor.
“Are you ill or not?” asked Nastasya and again received no answer. “You’d
better go out and get a breath of air,” she said after a pause. “Will you eat it or
not?”
“Afterwards,” he said weakly. “You can go.”
And he motioned her out.
She remained a little longer, looked at him with compassion and went out.
A few minutes afterwards, he raised his eyes and looked for a long while at
the tea and the soup. Then he took the bread, took up a spoon and began to eat.
He ate a little, three or four spoonfuls, without appetite, as it were
mechanically. His head ached less. After his meal he stretched himself on the
sofa again, but now he could not sleep; he lay without stirring, with his face in
the pillow. He was haunted by day-dreams and such strange day-dreams; in one,
that kept recurring, he fancied that he was in Africa, in Egypt, in some sort of
oasis. The caravan was resting, the camels were peacefully lying down; the
palms stood all around in a complete circle; all the party were at dinner. But he
was drinking water from a spring which flowed gurgling close by. And it was so
cool, it was wonderful, wonderful, blue, cold water running among the particoloured stones and over the clean sand which glistened here and there like
gold.... Suddenly he heard a clock strike. He started, roused himself, raised his
head, looked out of the window, and seeing how late it was, suddenly jumped up
wide awake as though someone had pulled him off the sofa. He crept on tiptoe to
the door, stealthily opened it and began listening on the staircase. His heart beat
terribly. But all was quiet on the stairs as if everyone was asleep.... It seemed to
him strange and monstrous that he could have slept in such forgetfulness from
the previous day and had done nothing, had prepared nothing yet.... And
meanwhile perhaps it had struck six. And his drowsiness and stupefaction were
followed by an extraordinary, feverish, as it were distracted haste. But the
preparations to be made were few. He concentrated all his energies on thinking
of everything and forgetting nothing; and his heart kept beating and thumping so
that he could hardly breathe. First he had to make a noose and sew it into his
overcoat—a work of a moment. He rummaged under his pillow and picked out
amongst the linen stuffed away under it, a worn out, old unwashed shirt. From its
rags he tore a long strip, a couple of inches wide and about sixteen inches long.
He folded this strip in two, took off his wide, strong summer overcoat of some
stout cotton material (his only outer garment) and began sewing the two ends of
the rag on the inside, under the left armhole. His hands shook as he sewed, but
he did it successfully so that nothing showed outside when he put the coat on
again. The needle and thread he had got ready long before and they lay on his
table in a piece of paper. As for the noose, it was a very ingenious device of his
own; the noose was intended for the axe. It was impossible for him to carry the
axe through the street in his hands. And if hidden under his coat he would still
have had to support it with his hand, which would have been noticeable. Now he
had only to put the head of the axe in the noose, and it would hang quietly under
his arm on the inside. Putting his hand in his coat pocket, he could hold the end
of the handle all the way, so that it did not swing; and as the coat was very full, a
regular sack in fact, it could not be seen from outside that he was holding
something with the hand that was in the pocket. This noose, too, he had designed
a fortnight before.
 
