Five minutes later he raised his head with a strange smile. That was a strange
thought.
“Perhaps it really would be better in Siberia,” he thought suddenly.
He could not have said how long he sat there with vague thoughts surging
through his mind. All at once the door opened and Dounia came in. At first she
stood still and looked at him from the doorway, just as he had done at Sonia;
then she came in and sat down in the same place as yesterday, on the chair facing
him. He looked silently and almost vacantly at her.
“Don’t be angry, brother; I’ve only come for one minute,” said Dounia.
Her face looked thoughtful but not stern. Her eyes were bright and soft. He
saw that she too had come to him with love.
“Brother, now I know all, all. Dmitri Prokofitch has explained and told me
everything. They are worrying and persecuting you through a stupid and
contemptible suspicion.... Dmitri Prokofitch told me that there is no danger, and
that you are wrong in looking upon it with such horror. I don’t think so, and I
fully understand how indignant you must be, and that that indignation may have
a permanent effect on you. That’s what I am afraid of. As for your cutting
yourself off from us, I don’t judge you, I don’t venture to judge you, and forgive
me for having blamed you for it. I feel that I too, if I had so great a trouble,
should keep away from everyone. I shall tell mother nothing of this, but I shall
talk about you continually and shall tell her from you that you will come very
soon. Don’t worry about her; I will set her mind at rest; but don’t you try her too
much—come once at least; remember that she is your mother. And now I have
come simply to say” (Dounia began to get up) “that if you should need me or
should need... all my life or anything... call me, and I’ll come. Good-bye!”
She turned abruptly and went towards the door.
“Dounia!” Raskolnikov stopped her and went towards her. “That Razumihin,
Dmitri Prokofitch, is a very good fellow.”
Dounia flushed slightly.
“Well?” she asked, waiting a moment.
“He is competent, hardworking, honest and capable of real love.... Good-bye,
Dounia.”
Dounia flushed crimson, then suddenly she took alarm.
“But what does it mean, brother? Are we really parting for ever that you...
give me such a parting message?”
“Never mind.... Good-bye.”