“Honoured sir, honoured sir,” cried Marmeladov recovering himself—“Oh,
sir, perhaps all this seems a laughing matter to you, as it does to others, and
perhaps I am only worrying you with the stupidity of all the trivial details of my
home life, but it is not a laughing matter to me. For I can feel it all.... And the
whole of that heavenly day of my life and the whole of that evening I passed in
fleeting dreams of how I would arrange it all, and how I would dress all the
children, and how I should give her rest, and how I should rescue my own
daughter from dishonour and restore her to the bosom of her family.... And a
great deal more.... Quite excusable, sir. Well, then, sir” (Marmeladov suddenly
gave a sort of start, raised his head and gazed intently at his listener) “well, on
the very next day after all those dreams, that is to say, exactly five days ago, in
the evening, by a cunning trick, like a thief in the night, I stole from Katerina
Ivanovna the key of her box, took out what was left of my earnings, how much it
was I have forgotten, and now look at me, all of you! It’s the fifth day since I left
home, and they are looking for me there and it’s the end of my employment, and
my uniform is lying in a tavern on the Egyptian bridge. I exchanged it for the
garments I have on... and it’s the end of everything!”
Marmeladov struck his forehead with his fist, clenched his teeth, closed his
eyes and leaned heavily with his elbow on the table. But a minute later his face
suddenly changed and with a certain assumed slyness and affectation of bravado,
he glanced at Raskolnikov, laughed and said:
“This morning I went to see Sonia, I went to ask her for a pick-me-up! He-hehe!”
“You don’t say she gave it to you?” cried one of the new-comers; he shouted
the words and went off into a guffaw.
“This very quart was bought with her money,” Marmeladov declared,
addressing himself exclusively to Raskolnikov. “Thirty copecks she gave me
with her own hands, her last, all she had, as I saw.... She said nothing, she only
looked at me without a word.... Not on earth, but up yonder... they grieve over
men, they weep, but they don’t blame them, they don’t blame them! But it hurts
more, it hurts more when they don’t blame! Thirty copecks yes! And maybe she
needs them now, eh? What do you think, my dear sir? For now she’s got to keep
up her appearance. It costs money, that smartness, that special smartness, you
know? Do you understand? And there’s pomatum, too, you see, she must have
things; petticoats, starched ones, shoes, too, real jaunty ones to show off her foot
when she has to step over a puddle. Do you understand, sir, do you understand
what all that smartness means? And here I, her own father, here I took thirty
copecks of that money for a drink! And I am drinking it! And I have already
drunk it! Come, who will have pity on a man like me, eh? Are you sorry for me,
sir, or not? Tell me, sir, are you sorry or not? He-he-he!”
He would have filled his glass, but there was no drink left. The pot was empty.
“What are you to be pitied for?” shouted the tavern-keeper who was again
near them.
 
