 She knows everyone in the neighbourhood, and
that month she was continually coming into the town, and as she is rather
talkative and fond of gossiping about her family affairs and particularly of
complaining to all and each of her husband—which is not at all right—so in a
short time she had spread her story not only in the town, but over the whole
surrounding district. It made me ill, but Dounia bore it better than I did, and if
only you could have seen how she endured it all and tried to comfort me and
cheer me up! She is an angel! But by God’s mercy, our sufferings were cut short:
Mr. Svidrigaïlov returned to his senses and repented and, probably feeling sorry
for Dounia, he laid before Marfa Petrovna a complete and unmistakable proof of
Dounia’s innocence, in the form of a letter Dounia had been forced to write and
give to him, before Marfa Petrovna came upon them in the garden. This letter,
which remained in Mr. Svidrigaïlov’s hands after her departure, she had written
to refuse personal explanations and secret interviews, for which he was
entreating her. In that letter she reproached him with great heat and indignation
for the baseness of his behaviour in regard to Marfa Petrovna, reminding him
that he was the father and head of a family and telling him how infamous it was
of him to torment and make unhappy a defenceless girl, unhappy enough
already. Indeed, dear Rodya, the letter was so nobly and touchingly written that I
sobbed when I read it and to this day I cannot read it without tears. Moreover,
the evidence of the servants, too, cleared Dounia’s reputation; they had seen and
known a great deal more than Mr. Svidrigaïlov had himself supposed—as indeed
is always the case with servants. Marfa Petrovna was completely taken aback,
and ‘again crushed’ as she said herself to us, but she was completely convinced
of Dounia’s innocence. The very next day, being Sunday, she went straight to the
Cathedral, knelt down and prayed with tears to Our Lady to give her strength to
bear this new trial and to do her duty. Then she came straight from the Cathedral
to us, told us the whole story, wept bitterly and, fully penitent, she embraced
Dounia and besought her to forgive her. The same morning without any delay,
she went round to all the houses in the town and everywhere, shedding tears, she
asserted in the most flattering terms Dounia’s innocence and the nobility of her
feelings and her behavior. What was more, she showed and read to everyone the
letter in Dounia’s own handwriting to Mr. Svidrigaïlov and even allowed them to
take copies of it—which I must say I think was superfluous. In this way she was
busy for several days in driving about the whole town, because some people had
taken offence through precedence having been given to others. And therefore
they had to take turns, so that in every house she was expected before she
arrived, and everyone knew that on such and such a day Marfa Petrovna would
be reading the letter in such and such a place and people assembled for every
reading of it, even many who had heard it several times already both in their own
houses and in other people’s. In my opinion a great deal, a very great deal of all
this was unnecessary; but that’s Marfa Petrovna’s character. 
