“Children? You referred to children,” Lebeziatnikov started off like a
warhorse at the trumpet call. “Children are a social question and a question of
first importance, I agree; but the question of children has another solution. Some
refuse to have children altogether, because they suggest the institution of the
family. We’ll speak of children later, but now as to the question of honour, I
confess that’s my weak point. That horrid, military, Pushkin expression is
unthinkable in the dictionary of the future. What does it mean indeed? It’s
nonsense, there will be no deception in a free marriage! That is only the natural
consequence of a legal marriage, so to say, its corrective, a protest. So that
indeed it’s not humiliating... and if I ever, to suppose an absurdity, were to be
legally married, I should be positively glad of it. I should say to my wife: ‘My
dear, hitherto I have loved you, now I respect you, for you’ve shown you can
protest!’ You laugh! That’s because you are incapable of getting away from
prejudices. Confound it all! I understand now where the unpleasantness is of
being deceived in a legal marriage, but it’s simply a despicable consequence of a
despicable position in which both are humiliated. When the deception is open, as
in a free marriage, then it does not exist, it’s unthinkable. Your wife will only
prove how she respects you by considering you incapable of opposing her
happiness and avenging yourself on her for her new husband. Damn it all! I
sometimes dream if I were to be married, pfoo! I mean if I were to marry, legally
or not, it’s just the same, I should present my wife with a lover if she had not
found one for herself. ‘My dear,’ I should say, ‘I love you, but even more than
that I desire you to respect me. See!’ Am I not right?”
Pyotr Petrovitch sniggered as he listened, but without much merriment. He
hardly heard it indeed. He was preoccupied with something else and even
Lebeziatnikov at last noticed it. Pyotr Petrovitch seemed excited and rubbed his
hands. Lebeziatnikov remembered all this and reflected upon it afterwards.