“I heard, on the contrary, that this Philip hanged himself.”
“Quite so, but what drove him, or rather perhaps disposed him, to suicide was
the systematic persecution and severity of Mr. Svidrigaïlov.”
“I don’t know that,” answered Dounia, dryly. “I only heard a queer story that
Philip was a sort of hypochondriac, a sort of domestic philosopher, the servants
used to say, ‘he read himself silly,’ and that he hanged himself partly on account
of Mr. Svidrigaïlov’s mockery of him and not his blows. When I was there he
behaved well to the servants, and they were actually fond of him, though they
certainly did blame him for Philip’s death.”
“I perceive, Avdotya Romanovna, that you seem disposed to undertake his
defence all of a sudden,” Luzhin observed, twisting his lips into an ambiguous
smile, “there’s no doubt that he is an astute man, and insinuating where ladies
are concerned, of which Marfa Petrovna, who has died so strangely, is a terrible
instance. My only desire has been to be of service to you and your mother with
my advice, in view of the renewed efforts which may certainly be anticipated
from him. For my part it’s my firm conviction, that he will end in a debtor’s
prison again. Marfa Petrovna had not the slightest intention of settling anything
substantial on him, having regard for his children’s interests, and, if she left him
anything, it would only be the merest sufficiency, something insignificant and
ephemeral, which would not last a year for a man of his habits.”
“Pyotr Petrovitch, I beg you,” said Dounia, “say no more of Mr. Svidrigaïlov.
It makes me miserable.”
“He has just been to see me,” said Raskolnikov, breaking his silence for the
first time.
There were exclamations from all, and they all turned to him. Even Pyotr
Petrovitch was roused.
“An hour and a half ago, he came in when I was asleep, waked me, and
introduced himself,” Raskolnikov continued. “He was fairly cheerful and at ease,
and quite hopes that we shall become friends. He is particularly anxious, by the
way, Dounia, for an interview with you, at which he asked me to assist. He has a
proposition to make to you, and he told me about it. He told me, too, that a week
before her death Marfa Petrovna left you three thousand roubles in her will,
Dounia, and that you can receive the money very shortly.”
“Thank God!” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna, crossing herself. “Pray for her
soul, Dounia!” 
