“You don’t understand, as I’ve told you already! Of course, she is in such a
position, but it’s another question. Quite another question! You simply despise
her. Seeing a fact which you mistakenly consider deserving of contempt, you
refuse to take a humane view of a fellow creature. You don’t know what a
character she is! I am only sorry that of late she has quite given up reading and
borrowing books. I used to lend them to her. I am sorry, too, that with all the
energy and resolution in protesting—which she has already shown once—she
has little self-reliance, little, so to say, independence, so as to break free from
certain prejudices and certain foolish ideas. Yet she thoroughly understands
some questions, for instance about kissing of hands, that is, that it’s an insult to a
woman for a man to kiss her hand, because it’s a sign of inequality. We had a
debate about it and I described it to her. She listened attentively to an account of
the workmen’s associations in France, too. Now I am explaining the question of
coming into the room in the future society.”
“And what’s that, pray?”
“We had a debate lately on the question: Has a member of the community the
right to enter another member’s room, whether man or woman, at any time... and
we decided that he has!”
“It might be at an inconvenient moment, he-he!”
Lebeziatnikov was really angry.
“You are always thinking of something unpleasant,” he cried with aversion.
“Tfoo! How vexed I am that when I was expounding our system, I referred
prematurely to the question of personal privacy! It’s always a stumbling-block to
people like you, they turn it into ridicule before they understand it. And how
proud they are of it, too! Tfoo! I’ve often maintained that that question should
not be approached by a novice till he has a firm faith in the system. And tell me,
please, what do you find so shameful even in cesspools? I should be the first to
be ready to clean out any cesspool you like. And it’s not a question of selfsacrifice,
it’s simply work, honourable, useful work which is as good as any
other and much better than the work of a Raphael and a Pushkin, because it is
more useful.”
“And more honourable, more honourable, he-he-he!”
“What do you mean by ‘more honourable’? I don’t understand such
expressions to describe human activity. ‘More honourable,’ ‘nobler’—all those
are old-fashioned prejudices which I reject. Everything which is of use to
mankind is honourable. I only understand one word: useful! You can snigger as
much as you like, but that’s so!”
Pyotr Petrovitch laughed heartily. He had finished counting the money and
was putting it away. But some of the notes he left on the table. The “cesspool
question” had already been a subject of dispute between them. What was absurd
was that it made Lebeziatnikov really angry, while it amused Luzhin and at that
moment he particularly wanted to anger his young friend.
“It’s your ill-luck yesterday that makes you so ill-humoured and annoying,”
blurted out Lebeziatnikov, who in spite of his “independence” and his “protests”
did not venture to oppose Pyotr Petrovitch and still behaved to him with some of
the respect habitual in earlier years.