Drawing a breath, pressing his hand against his throbbing heart, and once
more feeling for the axe and setting it straight, he began softly and cautiously
ascending the stairs, listening every minute. But the stairs, too, were quite
deserted; all the doors were shut; he met no one. One flat indeed on the first
floor was wide open and painters were at work in it, but they did not glance at
him. He stood still, thought a minute and went on. “Of course it would be better
if they had not been here, but... it’s two storeys above them.”
And there was the fourth storey, here was the door, here was the flat opposite,
the empty one. The flat underneath the old woman’s was apparently empty also;
the visiting card nailed on the door had been torn off—they had gone away!... He
was out of breath. For one instant the thought floated through his mind “Shall I
go back?” But he made no answer and began listening at the old woman’s door, a
dead silence. Then he listened again on the staircase, listened long and intently...
then looked about him for the last time, pulled himself together, drew himself up,
and once more tried the axe in the noose. “Am I very pale?” he wondered. “Am I
not evidently agitated? She is mistrustful.... Had I better wait a little longer... till
my heart leaves off thumping?”
But his heart did not leave off. On the contrary, as though to spite him, it
throbbed more and more violently. He could stand it no longer, he slowly put out
his hand to the bell and rang. Half a minute later he rang again, more loudly.
No answer. To go on ringing was useless and out of place. The old woman
was, of course, at home, but she was suspicious and alone. He had some
knowledge of her habits... and once more he put his ear to the door. Either his
senses were peculiarly keen (which it is difficult to suppose), or the sound was
really very distinct. Anyway, he suddenly heard something like the cautious
touch of a hand on the lock and the rustle of a skirt at the very door. Someone
was standing stealthily close to the lock and just as he was doing on the outside
was secretly listening within, and seemed to have her ear to the door.... He
moved a little on purpose and muttered something aloud that he might not have
the appearance of hiding, then rang a third time, but quietly, soberly, and without
impatience, Recalling it afterwards, that moment stood out in his mind vividly,
distinctly, for ever; he could not make out how he had had such cunning, for his
mind was as it were clouded at moments and he was almost unconscious of his
body.... An instant later he heard the latch unfastened. 
