He was not completely unconscious, however, all the time he was ill; he was
in a feverish state, sometimes delirious, sometimes half conscious. He
remembered a great deal afterwards. Sometimes it seemed as though there were
a number of people round him; they wanted to take him away somewhere, there
was a great deal of squabbling and discussing about him. Then he would be
alone in the room; they had all gone away afraid of him, and only now and then
opened the door a crack to look at him; they threatened him, plotted something
together, laughed, and mocked at him. He remembered Nastasya often at his
bedside; he distinguished another person, too, whom he seemed to know very
well, though he could not remember who he was, and this fretted him, even
made him cry. Sometimes he fancied he had been lying there a month; at other
times it all seemed part of the same day. But of that—of that he had no
recollection, and yet every minute he felt that he had forgotten something he
ought to remember. He worried and tormented himself trying to remember,
moaned, flew into a rage, or sank into awful, intolerable terror. Then he
struggled to get up, would have run away, but someone always prevented him by
force, and he sank back into impotence and forgetfulness. At last he returned to
complete consciousness.
It happened at ten o’clock in the morning. On fine days the sun shone into the
room at that hour, throwing a streak of light on the right wall and the corner near
the door. Nastasya was standing beside him with another person, a complete
stranger, who was looking at him very inquisitively. He was a young man with a
beard, wearing a full, short-waisted coat, and looked like a messenger. The
landlady was peeping in at the half-opened door. Raskolnikov sat up.
“Who is this, Nastasya?” he asked, pointing to the young man.
“I say, he’s himself again!” she said.
“He is himself,” echoed the man.
Concluding that he had returned to his senses, the landlady closed the door
and disappeared. She was always shy and dreaded conversations or discussions.
She was a woman of forty, not at all bad-looking, fat and buxom, with black eyes
and eyebrows, good-natured from fatness and laziness, and absurdly bashful.
“Who... are you?” he went on, addressing the man. But at that moment the
door was flung open, and, stooping a little, as he was so tall, Razumihin came in. 
