Lebeziatnikov looked perturbed.
“I’ve come to you, Sofya Semyonovna,” he began. “Excuse me... I thought I
should find you,” he said, addressing Raskolnikov suddenly, “that is, I didn’t
mean anything... of that sort... But I just thought... Katerina Ivanovna has gone
out of her mind,” he blurted out suddenly, turning from Raskolnikov to Sonia.
Sonia screamed.
“At least it seems so. But... we don’t know what to do, you see! She came
back—she seems to have been turned out somewhere, perhaps beaten.... So it
seems at least,... She had run to your father’s former chief, she didn’t find him at
home: he was dining at some other general’s.... Only fancy, she rushed off there,
to the other general’s, and, imagine, she was so persistent that she managed to
get the chief to see her, had him fetched out from dinner, it seems. You can
imagine what happened. She was turned out, of course; but, according to her
own story, she abused him and threw something at him. One may well believe
it.... How it is she wasn’t taken up, I can’t understand! Now she is telling
everyone, including Amalia Ivanovna; but it’s difficult to understand her, she is
screaming and flinging herself about.... Oh yes, she shouts that since everyone
has abandoned her, she will take the children and go into the street with a barrelorgan,
and the children will sing and dance, and she too, and collect money, and
will go every day under the general’s window... ‘to let everyone see well-born
children, whose father was an official, begging in the street.’ She keeps beating
the children and they are all crying. She is teaching Lida to sing ‘My Village,’
the boy to dance, Polenka the same. She is tearing up all the clothes, and making
them little caps like actors; she means to carry a tin basin and make it tinkle,
instead of music.... She won’t listen to anything.... Imagine the state of things!
It’s beyond anything!”
Lebeziatnikov would have gone on, but Sonia, who had heard him almost
breathless, snatched up her cloak and hat, and ran out of the room, putting on her
things as she went. Raskolnikov followed her and Lebeziatnikov came after him.
“She has certainly gone mad!” he said to Raskolnikov, as they went out into
the street. “I didn’t want to frighten Sofya Semyonovna, so I said ‘it seemed like
it,’ but there isn’t a doubt of it. They say that in consumption the tubercles
sometimes occur in the brain; it’s a pity I know nothing of medicine. I did try to
persuade her, but she wouldn’t listen.”