An elegant carriage stood in the middle of the road with a pair of spirited grey
horses; there was no one in it, and the coachman had got off his box and stood
by; the horses were being held by the bridle.... A mass of people had gathered
round, the police standing in front. One of them held a lighted lantern which he
was turning on something lying close to the wheels. Everyone was talking,
shouting, exclaiming; the coachman seemed at a loss and kept repeating:
“What a misfortune! Good Lord, what a misfortune!”
Raskolnikov pushed his way in as far as he could, and succeeded at last in
seeing the object of the commotion and interest. On the ground a man who had
been run over lay apparently unconscious, and covered with blood; he was very
badly dressed, but not like a workman. Blood was flowing from his head and
face; his face was crushed, mutilated and disfigured. He was evidently badly
injured.
“Merciful heaven!” wailed the coachman, “what more could I do? If I’d been
driving fast or had not shouted to him, but I was going quietly, not in a hurry.
Everyone could see I was going along just like everybody else. A drunken man
can’t walk straight, we all know.... I saw him crossing the street, staggering and
almost falling. I shouted again and a second and a third time, then I held the
horses in, but he fell straight under their feet! Either he did it on purpose or he
was very tipsy.... The horses are young and ready to take fright... they started, he
screamed... that made them worse. That’s how it happened!”
“That’s just how it was,” a voice in the crowd confirmed.
“He shouted, that’s true, he shouted three times,” another voice declared.
“Three times it was, we all heard it,” shouted a third.
But the coachman was not very much distressed and frightened. It was evident
that the carriage belonged to a rich and important person who was awaiting it
somewhere; the police, of course, were in no little anxiety to avoid upsetting his
arrangements. All they had to do was to take the injured man to the police station
and the hospital. No one knew his name.
Meanwhile Raskolnikov had squeezed in and stooped closer over him. The
lantern suddenly lighted up the unfortunate man’s face. He recognised him. 
