“To kill? Have the right to kill?” Sonia clasped her hands.
“Ach, Sonia!” he cried irritably and seemed about to make some retort, but
was contemptuously silent. “Don’t interrupt me, Sonia. I want to prove one thing
only, that the devil led me on then and he has shown me since that I had not the
right to take that path, because I am just such a louse as all the rest. He was
mocking me and here I’ve come to you now! Welcome your guest! If I were not
a louse, should I have come to you? Listen: when I went then to the old woman’s
I only went to try.... You may be sure of that!”
“And you murdered her!”
“But how did I murder her? Is that how men do murders? Do men go to
commit a murder as I went then? I will tell you some day how I went! Did I
murder the old woman? I murdered myself, not her! I crushed myself once for
all, for ever.... But it was the devil that killed that old woman, not I. Enough,
enough, Sonia, enough! Let me be!” he cried in a sudden spasm of agony, “let
me be!”
He leaned his elbows on his knees and squeezed his head in his hands as in a
vise.
“What suffering!” A wail of anguish broke from Sonia.
“Well, what am I to do now?” he asked, suddenly raising his head and looking
at her with a face hideously distorted by despair.
“What are you to do?” she cried, jumping up, and her eyes that had been full
of tears suddenly began to shine. “Stand up!” (She seized him by the shoulder,
he got up, looking at her almost bewildered.) “Go at once, this very minute,
stand at the cross-roads, bow down, first kiss the earth which you have defiled
and then bow down to all the world and say to all men aloud, ‘I am a murderer!’
Then God will send you life again. Will you go, will you go?” she asked him,
trembling all over, snatching his two hands, squeezing them tight in hers and
gazing at him with eyes full of fire.
He was amazed at her sudden ecstasy.
“You mean Siberia, Sonia? I must give myself up?” he asked gloomily.
“Suffer and expiate your sin by it, that’s what you must do.”
“No! I am not going to them, Sonia!”