“What a queer fellow! But here we are. Welcome to the staircase. You see,
that’s the way to Sofya Semyonovna. Look, there is no one at home. Don’t you
believe me? Ask Kapernaumov. She leaves the key with him. Here is Madame
de Kapernaumov herself. Hey, what? She is rather deaf. Has she gone out?
Where? Did you hear? She is not in and won’t be till late in the evening
probably. Well, come to my room; you wanted to come and see me, didn’t you?
Here we are. Madame Resslich’s not at home. She is a woman who is always
busy, an excellent woman I assure you.... She might have been of use to you if
you had been a little more sensible. Now, see! I take this five-per-cent bond out
of the bureau—see what a lot I’ve got of them still—this one will be turned into
cash to-day. I mustn’t waste any more time. The bureau is locked, the flat is
locked, and here we are again on the stairs. Shall we take a cab? I’m going to the
Islands. Would you like a lift? I’ll take this carriage. Ah, you refuse? You are
tired of it! Come for a drive! I believe it will come on to rain. Never mind, we’ll
put down the hood....”
Svidrigaïlov was already in the carriage. Raskolnikov decided that his
suspicions were at least for that moment unjust. Without answering a word he
turned and walked back towards the Hay Market. If he had only turned round on
his way he might have seen Svidrigaïlov get out not a hundred paces off, dismiss
the cab and walk along the pavement. But he had turned the corner and could see
nothing. Intense disgust drew him away from Svidrigaïlov.
“To think that I could for one instant have looked for help from that coarse
brute, that depraved sensualist and blackguard!” he cried.
Raskolnikov’s judgment was uttered too lightly and hastily: there was
something about Svidrigaïlov which gave him a certain original, even a
mysterious character. As concerned his sister, Raskolnikov was convinced that
Svidrigaïlov would not leave her in peace. But it was too tiresome and
unbearable to go on thinking and thinking about this.
When he was alone, he had not gone twenty paces before he sank, as usual,
into deep thought. On the bridge he stood by the railing and began gazing at the
water. And his sister was standing close by him.
He met her at the entrance to the bridge, but passed by without seeing her.
Dounia had never met him like this in the street before and was struck with
dismay. She stood still and did not know whether to call to him or not. Suddenly
she saw Svidrigaïlov coming quickly from the direction of the Hay Market.