“That was just what I wanted to add, only you interrupted, that that was a very
good decision of yours not to find out these secrets. Leave it to time, don’t worry
about it. You’ll know it all in time when it must be. Yesterday a man said to me
that what a man needs is fresh air, fresh air, fresh air. I mean to go to him directly
to find out what he meant by that.”
Razumihin stood lost in thought and excitement, making a silent conclusion.
“He’s a political conspirator! He must be. And he’s on the eve of some
desperate step, that’s certain. It can only be that! And... and Dounia knows,” he
thought suddenly.
“So Avdotya Romanovna comes to see you,” he said, weighing each syllable,
“and you’re going to see a man who says we need more air, and so of course that
letter... that too must have something to do with it,” he concluded to himself.
“What letter?”
“She got a letter to-day. It upset her very much—very much indeed. Too much
so. I began speaking of you, she begged me not to. Then... then she said that
perhaps we should very soon have to part... then she began warmly thanking me
for something; then she went to her room and locked herself in.”
“She got a letter?” Raskolnikov asked thoughtfully.
“Yes, and you didn’t know? hm...”
They were both silent.
“Good-bye, Rodion. There was a time, brother, when I.... Never mind, goodbye.
You see, there was a time.... Well, good-bye! I must be off too. I am not
going to drink. There’s no need now.... That’s all stuff!”
He hurried out; but when he had almost closed the door behind him, he
suddenly opened it again, and said, looking away:
“Oh, by the way, do you remember that murder, you know Porfiry’s, that old
woman? Do you know the murderer has been found, he has confessed and given
the proofs. It’s one of those very workmen, the painter, only fancy! Do you
remember I defended them here? Would you believe it, all that scene of fighting
and laughing with his companions on the stairs while the porter and the two
witnesses were going up, he got up on purpose to disarm suspicion. The cunning,
the presence of mind of the young dog! One can hardly credit it; but it’s his own
explanation, he has confessed it all. And what a fool I was about it! Well, he’s
simply a genius of hypocrisy and resourcefulness in disarming the suspicions of
the lawyers—so there’s nothing much to wonder at, I suppose! Of course people
like that are always possible. And the fact that he couldn’t keep up the character,
but confessed, makes him easier to believe in. But what a fool I was! I was
frantic on their side!”
“Tell me, please, from whom did you hear that, and why does it interest you
so?” Raskolnikov asked with unmistakable agitation.
“What next? You ask me why it interests me!... Well, I heard it from Porfiry,
among others... It was from him I heard almost all about it.”