“He is always humbugging, confound him,” cried Razumihin, jumping up and
gesticulating. “What’s the use of talking to you? He does all that on purpose; you
don’t know him, Rodion! He took their side yesterday, simply to make fools of
them. And the things he said yesterday! And they were delighted! He can keep it
up for a fortnight together. Last year he persuaded us that he was going into a
monastery: he stuck to it for two months. Not long ago he took it into his head to
declare he was going to get married, that he had everything ready for the
wedding. He ordered new clothes indeed. We all began to congratulate him.
There was no bride, nothing, all pure fantasy!”
“Ah, you are wrong! I got the clothes before. It was the new clothes in fact
that made me think of taking you in.”
“Are you such a good dissembler?” Raskolnikov asked carelessly.
“You wouldn’t have supposed it, eh? Wait a bit, I shall take you in, too. Haha-ha! No, I’ll tell you the truth. All these questions about crime, environment,
children, recall to my mind an article of yours which interested me at the time.
‘On Crime’... or something of the sort, I forget the title, I read it with pleasure
two months ago in the Periodical Review.”
“My article? In the Periodical Review?” Raskolnikov asked in astonishment.
“I certainly did write an article upon a book six months ago when I left the
university, but I sent it to the Weekly Review.”
“But it came out in the Periodical.”
“And the Weekly Review ceased to exist, so that’s why it wasn’t printed at the
time.”
“That’s true; but when it ceased to exist, the Weekly Review was amalgamated
with the Periodical, and so your article appeared two months ago in the latter.
Didn’t you know?”
Raskolnikov had not known.
“Why, you might get some money out of them for the article! What a strange
person you are! You lead such a solitary life that you know nothing of matters
that concern you directly. It’s a fact, I assure you.”
“Bravo, Rodya! I knew nothing about it either!” cried Razumihin. “I’ll run today to the reading-room and ask for the number. Two months ago? What was the
date? It doesn’t matter though, I will find it. Think of not telling us!”
“How did you find out that the article was mine? It’s only signed with an
initial.”
“I only learnt it by chance, the other day. Through the editor; I know him.... I
was very much interested.” 
