When next morning at eleven o’clock punctually Raskolnikov went into the
department of the investigation of criminal causes and sent his name in to
Porfiry Petrovitch, he was surprised at being kept waiting so long: it was at least
ten minutes before he was summoned. He had expected that they would pounce
upon him. But he stood in the waiting-room, and people, who apparently had
nothing to do with him, were continually passing to and fro before him. In the
next room which looked like an office, several clerks were sitting writing and
obviously they had no notion who or what Raskolnikov might be. He looked
uneasily and suspiciously about him to see whether there was not some guard,
some mysterious watch being kept on him to prevent his escape. But there was
nothing of the sort: he saw only the faces of clerks absorbed in petty details, then
other people, no one seemed to have any concern with him. He might go where
he liked for them. The conviction grew stronger in him that if that enigmatic
man of yesterday, that phantom sprung out of the earth, had seen everything,
they would not have let him stand and wait like that. And would they have
waited till he elected to appear at eleven? Either the man had not yet given
information, or... or simply he knew nothing, had seen nothing (and how could
he have seen anything?) and so all that had happened to him the day before was
again a phantom exaggerated by his sick and overstrained imagination. This
conjecture had begun to grow strong the day before, in the midst of all his alarm
and despair. Thinking it all over now and preparing for a fresh conflict, he was
suddenly aware that he was trembling—and he felt a rush of indignation at the
thought that he was trembling with fear at facing that hateful Porfiry Petrovitch.
What he dreaded above all was meeting that man again; he hated him with an
intense, unmitigated hatred and was afraid his hatred might betray him. His
indignation was such that he ceased trembling at once; he made ready to go in
with a cold and arrogant bearing and vowed to himself to keep as silent as
possible, to watch and listen and for once at least to control his overstrained
nerves. At that moment he was summoned to Porfiry Petrovitch.
He found Porfiry Petrovitch alone in his study. His study was a room neither
large nor small, furnished with a large writing-table, that stood before a sofa,
upholstered in checked material, a bureau, a bookcase in the corner and several
chairs—all government furniture, of polished yellow wood. In the further wall
there was a closed door, beyond it there were no doubt other rooms.