“No one in?” Raskolnikov asked, addressing the person at the bureau.
“Whom do you want?”
“A-ah! Not a sound was heard, not a sight was seen, but I scent the Russian...
how does it go on in the fairy tale... I’ve forgotten! ‘At your service!’” a familiar
voice cried suddenly.
Raskolnikov shuddered. The Explosive Lieutenant stood before him. He had
just come in from the third room. “It is the hand of fate,” thought Raskolnikov.
“Why is he here?”
“You’ve come to see us? What about?” cried Ilya Petrovitch. He was
obviously in an exceedingly good humour and perhaps a trifle exhilarated. “If
it’s on business you are rather early.[*] It’s only a chance that I am here...
however I’ll do what I can. I must admit, I... what is it, what is it? Excuse me....”
[*] Dostoevsky appears to have forgotten that it is after
sunset, and that the last time Raskolnikov visited the
police office at two in the afternoon he was reproached for
coming too late.—TRANSLATOR.
“Raskolnikov.”
“Of course, Raskolnikov. You didn’t imagine I’d forgotten? Don’t think I am
like that... Rodion Ro—Ro—Rodionovitch, that’s it, isn’t it?”
“Rodion Romanovitch.”
“Yes, yes, of course, Rodion Romanovitch! I was just getting at it. I made
many inquiries about you. I assure you I’ve been genuinely grieved since that...
since I behaved like that... it was explained to me afterwards that you were a
literary man... and a learned one too... and so to say the first steps... Mercy on
us! What literary or scientific man does not begin by some originality of
conduct! My wife and I have the greatest respect for literature, in my wife it’s a
genuine passion! Literature and art! If only a man is a gentleman, all the rest can
be gained by talents, learning, good sense, genius. As for a hat—well, what does
a hat matter? I can buy a hat as easily as I can a bun; but what’s under the hat,
what the hat covers, I can’t buy that! I was even meaning to come and apologise
to you, but thought maybe you’d... But I am forgetting to ask you, is there
anything you want really? I hear your family have come?”