Svidrigaïlov sat lost in thought.
“And what if there are only spiders there, or something of that sort,” he said
suddenly.
“He is a madman,” thought Raskolnikov.
“We always imagine eternity as something beyond our conception, something
vast, vast! But why must it be vast? Instead of all that, what if it’s one little
room, like a bath house in the country, black and grimy and spiders in every
corner, and that’s all eternity is? I sometimes fancy it like that.”
“Can it be you can imagine nothing juster and more comforting than that?”
Raskolnikov cried, with a feeling of anguish.
“Juster? And how can we tell, perhaps that is just, and do you know it’s what I
would certainly have made it,” answered Svidrigaïlov, with a vague smile.
This horrible answer sent a cold chill through Raskolnikov. Svidrigaïlov raised
his head, looked at him, and suddenly began laughing.
“Only think,” he cried, “half an hour ago we had never seen each other, we
regarded each other as enemies; there is a matter unsettled between us; we’ve
thrown it aside, and away we’ve gone into the abstract! Wasn’t I right in saying
that we were birds of a feather?”
“Kindly allow me,” Raskolnikov went on irritably, “to ask you to explain why
you have honoured me with your visit... and... and I am in a hurry, I have no time
to waste. I want to go out.”
“By all means, by all means. Your sister, Avdotya Romanovna, is going to be
married to Mr. Luzhin, Pyotr Petrovitch?”
“Can you refrain from any question about my sister and from mentioning her
name? I can’t understand how you dare utter her name in my presence, if you
really are Svidrigaïlov.”
“Why, but I’ve come here to speak about her; how can I avoid mentioning
her?”
“Very good, speak, but make haste.”
“I am sure that you must have formed your own opinion of this Mr. Luzhin,
who is a connection of mine through my wife, if you have only seen him for half
an hour, or heard any facts about him. He is no match for Avdotya Romanovna. I
believe Avdotya Romanovna is sacrificing herself generously and imprudently
for the sake of... for the sake of her family. I fancied from all I had heard of you
that you would be very glad if the match could be broken off without the
sacrifice of worldly advantages. Now I know you personally, I am convinced of
it.”
“All this is very naïve... excuse me, I should have said impudent on your
part,” said Raskolnikov.
“You mean to say that I am seeking my own ends. Don’t be uneasy, Rodion
Romanovitch, if I were working for my own advantage, I would not have spoken
out so directly. I am not quite a fool. I will confess something psychologically
curious about that: just now, defending my love for Avdotya Romanovna, I said I
was myself the victim. Well, let me tell you that I’ve no feeling of love now, not
the slightest, so that I wonder myself indeed, for I really did feel something...”
 
