Think what the
passion for propaganda will bring some girls to! I, of course, threw it all on my
destiny, posed as hungering and thirsting for light, and finally resorted to the
most powerful weapon in the subjection of the female heart, a weapon which
never fails one. It’s the well-known resource—flattery. Nothing in the world is
harder than speaking the truth and nothing easier than flattery. If there’s the
hundredth part of a false note in speaking the truth, it leads to a discord, and that
leads to trouble. But if all, to the last note, is false in flattery, it is just as
agreeable, and is heard not without satisfaction. It may be a coarse satisfaction,
but still a satisfaction. And however coarse the flattery, at least half will be sure
to seem true. That’s so for all stages of development and classes of society. A
vestal virgin might be seduced by flattery. I can never remember without
laughter how I once seduced a lady who was devoted to her husband, her
children, and her principles. What fun it was and how little trouble! And the lady
really had principles—of her own, anyway. All my tactics lay in simply being
utterly annihilated and prostrate before her purity. I flattered her shamelessly,
and as soon as I succeeded in getting a pressure of the hand, even a glance from
her, I would reproach myself for having snatched it by force, and would declare
that she had resisted, so that I could never have gained anything but for my being
so unprincipled. I maintained that she was so innocent that she could not foresee
my treachery, and yielded to me unconsciously, unawares, and so on. In fact, I
triumphed, while my lady remained firmly convinced that she was innocent,
chaste, and faithful to all her duties and obligations and had succumbed quite by
accident. And how angry she was with me when I explained to her at last that it
was my sincere conviction that she was just as eager as I. Poor Marfa Petrovna
was awfully weak on the side of flattery, and if I had only cared to, I might have
had all her property settled on me during her lifetime. (I am drinking an awful lot
of wine now and talking too much.) I hope you won’t be angry if I mention now
that I was beginning to produce the same effect on Avdotya Romanovna. But I
was stupid and impatient and spoiled it all. Avdotya Romanovna had several
times—and one time in particular—been greatly displeased by the expression of
my eyes, would you believe it? There was sometimes a light in them which
frightened her and grew stronger and stronger and more unguarded till it was
hateful to her. No need to go into detail, but we parted.