“A cup of tea, then?”
“A cup of tea, maybe.”
“Pour it out. Stay, I’ll pour it out myself. Sit down.”
He poured out two cups, left his dinner, and sat on the sofa again. As before,
he put his left arm round the sick man’s head, raised him up and gave him tea in
spoonfuls, again blowing each spoonful steadily and earnestly, as though this
process was the principal and most effective means towards his friend’s
recovery. Raskolnikov said nothing and made no resistance, though he felt quite
strong enough to sit up on the sofa without support and could not merely have
held a cup or a spoon, but even perhaps could have walked about. But from
some queer, almost animal, cunning he conceived the idea of hiding his strength
and lying low for a time, pretending if necessary not to be yet in full possession
of his faculties, and meanwhile listening to find out what was going on. Yet he
could not overcome his sense of repugnance. After sipping a dozen spoonfuls of
tea, he suddenly released his head, pushed the spoon away capriciously, and sank
back on the pillow. There were actually real pillows under his head now, down
pillows in clean cases, he observed that, too, and took note of it.
“Pashenka must give us some raspberry jam to-day to make him some
raspberry tea,” said Razumihin, going back to his chair and attacking his soup
and beer again.
“And where is she to get raspberries for you?” asked Nastasya, balancing a
saucer on her five outspread fingers and sipping tea through a lump of sugar.
“She’ll get it at the shop, my dear. You see, Rodya, all sorts of things have
been happening while you have been laid up. When you decamped in that
rascally way without leaving your address, I felt so angry that I resolved to find
you out and punish you. I set to work that very day. How I ran about making
inquiries for you! This lodging of yours I had forgotten, though I never
remembered it, indeed, because I did not know it; and as for your old lodgings, I
could only remember it was at the Five Corners, Harlamov’s house. I kept trying
to find that Harlamov’s house, and afterwards it turned out that it was not
Harlamov’s, but Buch’s. How one muddles up sound sometimes! So I lost my
temper, and I went on the chance to the address bureau next day, and only fancy,
in two minutes they looked you up! Your name is down there.”
 
