“It was base of me to say that.... My mother herself is almost a beggar... and I
told a lie to keep my lodging... and be fed,” Raskolnikov said loudly and
distinctly.
“Yes, you did very sensibly. But the worst of it is that at that point Mr.
Tchebarov turns up, a business man. Pashenka would never have thought of
doing anything on her own account, she is too retiring; but the business man is
by no means retiring, and first thing he puts the question, ‘Is there any hope of
realising the I O U?’ Answer: there is, because he has a mother who would save
her Rodya with her hundred and twenty-five roubles pension, if she has to starve
herself; and a sister, too, who would go into bondage for his sake. That’s what he
was building upon.... Why do you start? I know all the ins and outs of your
affairs now, my dear boy—it’s not for nothing that you were so open with
Pashenka when you were her prospective son-in-law, and I say all this as a
friend.... But I tell you what it is; an honest and sensitive man is open; and a
business man ‘listens and goes on eating’ you up. Well, then she gave the I O U
by way of payment to this Tchebarov, and without hesitation he made a formal
demand for payment. When I heard of all this I wanted to blow him up, too, to
clear my conscience, but by that time harmony reigned between me and
Pashenka, and I insisted on stopping the whole affair, engaging that you would
pay. I went security for you, brother. Do you understand? We called Tchebarov,
flung him ten roubles and got the I O U back from him, and here I have the
honour of presenting it to you. She trusts your word now. Here, take it, you see I
have torn it.”
Razumihin put the note on the table. Raskolnikov looked at him and turned to
the wall without uttering a word. Even Razumihin felt a twinge.
“I see, brother,” he said a moment later, “that I have been playing the fool
again. I thought I should amuse you with my chatter, and I believe I have only
made you cross.”
“Was it you I did not recognise when I was delirious?” Raskolnikov asked,
after a moment’s pause without turning his head.
“Yes, and you flew into a rage about it, especially when I brought Zametov
one day.” 
