He laid the axe on the ground near the dead body and felt at once in her
pocket (trying to avoid the streaming body)—the same right-hand pocket from
which she had taken the key on his last visit. He was in full possession of his
faculties, free from confusion or giddiness, but his hands were still trembling. He
remembered afterwards that he had been particularly collected and careful,
trying all the time not to get smeared with blood.... He pulled out the keys at
once, they were all, as before, in one bunch on a steel ring. He ran at once into
the bedroom with them. It was a very small room with a whole shrine of holy
images. Against the other wall stood a big bed, very clean and covered with a
silk patchwork wadded quilt. Against a third wall was a chest of drawers.
Strange to say, so soon as he began to fit the keys into the chest, so soon as he
heard their jingling, a convulsive shudder passed over him. He suddenly felt
tempted again to give it all up and go away. But that was only for an instant; it
was too late to go back. He positively smiled at himself, when suddenly another
terrifying idea occurred to his mind. He suddenly fancied that the old woman
might be still alive and might recover her senses. Leaving the keys in the chest,
he ran back to the body, snatched up the axe and lifted it once more over the old
woman, but did not bring it down. There was no doubt that she was dead.
Bending down and examining her again more closely, he saw clearly that the
skull was broken and even battered in on one side. He was about to feel it with
his finger, but drew back his hand and indeed it was evident without that.
Meanwhile there was a perfect pool of blood. All at once he noticed a string on
her neck; he tugged at it, but the string was strong and did not snap and besides,
it was soaked with blood. He tried to pull it out from the front of the dress, but
something held it and prevented its coming. In his impatience he raised the axe
again to cut the string from above on the body, but did not dare, and with
difficulty, smearing his hand and the axe in the blood, after two minutes’ hurried
effort, he cut the string and took it off without touching the body with the axe; he
was not mistaken—it was a purse. On the string were two crosses, one of Cyprus
wood and one of copper, and an image in silver filigree, and with them a small
greasy chamois leather purse with a steel rim and ring. The purse was stuffed
very full; Raskolnikov thrust it in his pocket without looking at it, flung the
crosses on the old woman’s body and rushed back into the bedroom, this time
taking the axe with him.
He was in terrible haste, he snatched the keys, and began trying them again.
But he was unsuccessful. They would not fit in the locks. It was not so much that
his hands were shaking, but that he kept making mistakes; though he saw for
instance that a key was not the right one and would not fit, still he tried to put it
in. Suddenly he remembered and realised that the big key with the deep notches,
which was hanging there with the small keys could not possibly belong to the
chest of drawers (on his last visit this had struck him), but to some strong box,
and that everything perhaps was hidden in that box. He left the chest of drawers,
and at once felt under the bedstead, knowing that old women usually keep boxes
under their beds. And so it was; there was a good-sized box under the bed, at
least a yard in length, with an arched lid covered with red leather and studded
with steel nails. The notched key fitted at once and unlocked it. At the top, under
a white sheet, was a coat of red brocade lined with hareskin; under it was a silk
dress, then a shawl and it seemed as though there was nothing below but clothes.
The first thing he did was to wipe his blood-stained hands on the red brocade.
“It’s red, and on red blood will be less noticeable,” the thought passed through
his mind; then he suddenly came to himself. “Good God, am I going out of my
senses?” he thought with terror.
 
