The policeman saw it all in a flash. The stout gentleman was easy to
understand, he turned to consider the girl. The policeman bent over to examine
her more closely, and his face worked with genuine compassion.
“Ah, what a pity!” he said, shaking his head—“why, she is quite a child! She
has been deceived, you can see that at once. Listen, lady,” he began addressing
her, “where do you live?” The girl opened her weary and sleepy-looking eyes,
gazed blankly at the speaker and waved her hand.
“Here,” said Raskolnikov feeling in his pocket and finding twenty copecks,
“here, call a cab and tell him to drive her to her address. The only thing is to find
out her address!”
“Missy, missy!” the policeman began again, taking the money. “I’ll fetch you
a cab and take you home myself. Where shall I take you, eh? Where do you
live?”
“Go away! They won’t let me alone,” the girl muttered, and once more waved
her hand.
“Ach, ach, how shocking! It’s shameful, missy, it’s a shame!” He shook his
head again, shocked, sympathetic and indignant.
“It’s a difficult job,” the policeman said to Raskolnikov, and as he did so, he
looked him up and down in a rapid glance. He, too, must have seemed a strange
figure to him: dressed in rags and handing him money!
“Did you meet her far from here?” he asked him.
“I tell you she was walking in front of me, staggering, just here, in the
boulevard. She only just reached the seat and sank down on it.”
“Ah, the shameful things that are done in the world nowadays, God have
mercy on us! An innocent creature like that, drunk already! She has been
deceived, that’s a sure thing. See how her dress has been torn too.... Ah, the vice
one sees nowadays! And as likely as not she belongs to gentlefolk too, poor ones
maybe.... There are many like that nowadays. She looks refined, too, as though
she were a lady,” and he bent over her once more.
Perhaps he had daughters growing up like that, “looking like ladies and
refined” with pretensions to gentility and smartness....
“The chief thing is,” Raskolnikov persisted, “to keep her out of this
scoundrel’s hands! Why should he outrage her! It’s as clear as day what he is
after; ah, the brute, he is not moving off!”
Raskolnikov spoke aloud and pointed to him. The gentleman heard him, and
seemed about to fly into a rage again, but thought better of it, and confined
himself to a contemptuous look. He then walked slowly another ten paces away
and again halted.
“Keep her out of his hands we can,” said the constable thoughtfully, “if only
she’d tell us where to take her, but as it is.... Missy, hey, missy!” he bent over her
once more.
 
