His face worked, as though in convulsion.
“Ach, what are you saying, Dounia! Don’t be angry, please, Rodya.... Why did
you say that, Dounia?” Pulcheria Alexandrovna began, overwhelmed—“You
see, coming here, I was dreaming all the way, in the train, how we should meet,
how we should talk over everything together.... And I was so happy, I did not
notice the journey! But what am I saying? I am happy now.... You should not,
Dounia.... I am happy now—simply in seeing you, Rodya....”
“Hush, mother,” he muttered in confusion, not looking at her, but pressing her
hand. “We shall have time to speak freely of everything!”
As he said this, he was suddenly overwhelmed with confusion and turned
pale. Again that awful sensation he had known of late passed with deadly chill
over his soul. Again it became suddenly plain and perceptible to him that he had
just told a fearful lie—that he would never now be able to speak freely of
everything—that he would never again be able to speak of anything to anyone.
The anguish of this thought was such that for a moment he almost forgot
himself. He got up from his seat, and not looking at anyone walked towards the
door.
“What are you about?” cried Razumihin, clutching him by the arm.
He sat down again, and began looking about him, in silence. They were all
looking at him in perplexity.
“But what are you all so dull for?” he shouted, suddenly and quite
unexpectedly. “Do say something! What’s the use of sitting like this? Come, do
speak. Let us talk.... We meet together and sit in silence.... Come, anything!”
“Thank God; I was afraid the same thing as yesterday was beginning again,”
said Pulcheria Alexandrovna, crossing herself.
“What is the matter, Rodya?” asked Avdotya Romanovna, distrustfully.
“Oh, nothing! I remembered something,” he answered, and suddenly laughed.
“Well, if you remembered something; that’s all right!... I was beginning to
think...” muttered Zossimov, getting up from the sofa. “It is time for me to be
off. I will look in again perhaps... if I can...” He made his bows, and went out.
“What an excellent man!” observed Pulcheria Alexandrovna.
“Yes, excellent, splendid, well-educated, intelligent,” Raskolnikov began,
suddenly speaking with surprising rapidity, and a liveliness he had not shown till
then. “I can’t remember where I met him before my illness.... I believe I have
met him somewhere——... And this is a good man, too,” he nodded at
Razumihin. “Do you like him, Dounia?” he asked her; and suddenly, for some
unknown reason, laughed.
 
