A retired clerk of the commissariat department came, too; he was drunk, had a
loud and most unseemly laugh and only fancy—was without a waistcoat! One of
the visitors sat straight down to the table without even greeting Katerina
Ivanovna. Finally one person having no suit appeared in his dressing-gown, but
this was too much, and the efforts of Amalia Ivanovna and the Pole succeeded in
removing him. The Pole brought with him, however, two other Poles who did
not live at Amalia Ivanovna’s and whom no one had seen here before. All this
irritated Katerina Ivanovna intensely. “For whom had they made all these
preparations then?” To make room for the visitors the children had not even been
laid for at the table; but the two little ones were sitting on a bench in the furthest
corner with their dinner laid on a box, while Polenka as a big girl had to look
after them, feed them, and keep their noses wiped like well-bred children’s.
Katerina Ivanovna, in fact, could hardly help meeting her guests with
increased dignity, and even haughtiness. She stared at some of them with special
severity, and loftily invited them to take their seats. Rushing to the conclusion
that Amalia Ivanovna must be responsible for those who were absent, she began
treating her with extreme nonchalance, which the latter promptly observed and
resented. Such a beginning was no good omen for the end. All were seated at
last.
Raskolnikov came in almost at the moment of their return from the cemetery.
Katerina Ivanovna was greatly delighted to see him, in the first place, because he
was the one “educated visitor, and, as everyone knew, was in two years to take a
professorship in the university,” and secondly because he immediately and
respectfully apologised for having been unable to be at the funeral. She
positively pounced upon him, and made him sit on her left hand (Amalia
Ivanovna was on her right). In spite of her continual anxiety that the dishes
should be passed round correctly and that everyone should taste them, in spite of
the agonising cough which interrupted her every minute and seemed to have
grown worse during the last few days, she hastened to pour out in a half whisper
to Raskolnikov all her suppressed feelings and her just indignation at the failure
of the dinner, interspersing her remarks with lively and uncontrollable laughter at
the expense of her visitors and especially of her landlady.