Fear gained more and more mastery over him, especially after this second,
quite unexpected murder. He longed to run away from the place as fast as
possible. And if at that moment he had been capable of seeing and reasoning
more correctly, if he had been able to realise all the difficulties of his position,
the hopelessness, the hideousness and the absurdity of it, if he could have
understood how many obstacles and, perhaps, crimes he had still to overcome or
to commit, to get out of that place and to make his way home, it is very possible
that he would have flung up everything, and would have gone to give himself up,
and not from fear, but from simple horror and loathing of what he had done. The
feeling of loathing especially surged up within him and grew stronger every
minute. He would not now have gone to the box or even into the room for
anything in the world.
But a sort of blankness, even dreaminess, had begun by degrees to take
possession of him; at moments he forgot himself, or rather, forgot what was of
importance, and caught at trifles. Glancing, however, into the kitchen and seeing
a bucket half full of water on a bench, he bethought him of washing his hands
and the axe. His hands were sticky with blood. He dropped the axe with the
blade in the water, snatched a piece of soap that lay in a broken saucer on the
window, and began washing his hands in the bucket. When they were clean, he
took out the axe, washed the blade and spent a long time, about three minutes,
washing the wood where there were spots of blood rubbing them with soap.
Then he wiped it all with some linen that was hanging to dry on a line in the
kitchen and then he was a long while attentively examining the axe at the
window. There was no trace left on it, only the wood was still damp. He
carefully hung the axe in the noose under his coat. Then as far as was possible,
in the dim light in the kitchen, he looked over his overcoat, his trousers and his
boots. At the first glance there seemed to be nothing but stains on the boots. He
wetted the rag and rubbed the boots. But he knew he was not looking thoroughly,
that there might be something quite noticeable that he was overlooking. He stood
in the middle of the room, lost in thought. Dark agonising ideas rose in his mind
—the idea that he was mad and that at that moment he was incapable of
reasoning, of protecting himself, that he ought perhaps to be doing something
utterly different from what he was now doing. “Good God!” he muttered “I must
fly, fly,” and he rushed into the entry. But here a shock of terror awaited him
such as he had never known before.
 
