She was for me. We went
there. How funny it was! I present myself—a landowner, a widower, of a wellknown
name, with connections, with a fortune. What if I am fifty and she is not
sixteen? Who thinks of that? But it’s fascinating, isn’t it? It is fascinating, ha-ha!
You should have seen how I talked to the papa and mamma. It was worth paying
to have seen me at that moment. She comes in, curtseys, you can fancy, still in a
short frock—an unopened bud! Flushing like a sunset—she had been told, no
doubt. I don’t know how you feel about female faces, but to my mind these
sixteen years, these childish eyes, shyness and tears of bashfulness are better
than beauty; and she is a perfect little picture, too. Fair hair in little curls, like a
lamb’s, full little rosy lips, tiny feet, a charmer!... Well, we made friends. I told
them I was in a hurry owing to domestic circumstances, and the next day, that is
the day before yesterday, we were betrothed. When I go now I take her on my
knee at once and keep her there.... Well, she flushes like a sunset and I kiss her
every minute. Her mamma of course impresses on her that this is her husband
and that this must be so. It’s simply delicious! The present betrothed condition is
perhaps better than marriage. Here you have what is called la nature et la vérité,
ha-ha! I’ve talked to her twice, she is far from a fool. Sometimes she steals a
look at me that positively scorches me. Her face is like Raphael’s Madonna. You
know, the Sistine Madonna’s face has something fantastic in it, the face of
mournful religious ecstasy. Haven’t you noticed it? Well, she’s something in that
line. The day after we’d been betrothed, I bought her presents to the value of
fifteen hundred roubles—a set of diamonds and another of pearls and a silver
dressing-case as large as this, with all sorts of things in it, so that even my
Madonna’s face glowed. I sat her on my knee, yesterday, and I suppose rather
too unceremoniously—she flushed crimson and the tears started, but she didn’t
want to show it. We were left alone, she suddenly flung herself on my neck (for
the first time of her own accord), put her little arms round me, kissed me, and
vowed that she would be an obedient, faithful, and good wife, would make me
happy, would devote all her life, every minute of her life, would sacrifice
everything, everything, and that all she asks in return is my respect, and that she
wants ‘nothing, nothing more from me, no presents.’ You’ll admit that to hear
such a confession, alone, from an angel of sixteen in a muslin frock, with little
curls, with a flush of maiden shyness in her cheeks and tears of enthusiasm in
her eyes is rather fascinating! Isn’t it fascinating? It’s worth paying for, isn’t it?
Well... listen, we’ll go to see my betrothed, only not just now!”