“You’d better tell me this,” Pyotr Petrovitch interrupted with haughty
displeasure, “can you... or rather are you really friendly enough with that young
person to ask her to step in here for a minute? I think they’ve all come back from
the cemetery... I heard the sound of steps... I want to see her, that young person.”
“What for?” Lebeziatnikov asked with surprise.
“Oh, I want to. I am leaving here to-day or to-morrow and therefore I wanted
to speak to her about... However, you may be present during the interview. It’s
better you should be, indeed. For there’s no knowing what you might imagine.”
“I shan’t imagine anything. I only asked and, if you’ve anything to say to her,
nothing is easier than to call her in. I’ll go directly and you may be sure I won’t
be in your way.”
Five minutes later Lebeziatnikov came in with Sonia. She came in very much
surprised and overcome with shyness as usual. She was always shy in such
circumstances and was always afraid of new people, she had been as a child and
was even more so now.... Pyotr Petrovitch met her “politely and affably,” but
with a certain shade of bantering familiarity which in his opinion was suitable
for a man of his respectability and weight in dealing with a creature so young
and so interesting as she. He hastened to “reassure” her and made her sit down
facing him at the table. Sonia sat down, looked about her—at Lebeziatnikov, at
the notes lying on the table and then again at Pyotr Petrovitch and her eyes
remained riveted on him. Lebeziatnikov was moving to the door. Pyotr
Petrovitch signed to Sonia to remain seated and stopped Lebeziatnikov.
“Is Raskolnikov in there? Has he come?” he asked him in a whisper.
“Raskolnikov? Yes. Why? Yes, he is there. I saw him just come in.... Why?”
“Well, I particularly beg you to remain here with us and not to leave me alone
with this... young woman. I only want a few words with her, but God knows
what they may make of it. I shouldn’t like Raskolnikov to repeat anything.... You
understand what I mean?”
“I understand!” Lebeziatnikov saw the point. “Yes, you are right.... Of course,
I am convinced personally that you have no reason to be uneasy, but... still, you
are right. Certainly I’ll stay. I’ll stand here at the window and not be in your
way... I think you are right...”
Pyotr Petrovitch returned to the sofa, sat down opposite Sonia, looked
attentively at her and assumed an extremely dignified, even severe expression, as
much as to say, “don’t you make any mistake, madam.” Sonia was overwhelmed
with embarrassment.
“In the first place, Sofya Semyonovna, will you make my excuses to your
respected mamma.... That’s right, isn’t it? Katerina Ivanovna stands in the place
of a mother to you?” Pyotr Petrovitch began with great dignity, though affably.
It was evident that his intentions were friendly.