“Did you talk to her about the tubercles?”
“Not precisely of the tubercles. Besides, she wouldn’t have understood! But
what I say is, that if you convince a person logically that he has nothing to cry
about, he’ll stop crying. That’s clear. Is it your conviction that he won’t?”
“Life would be too easy if it were so,” answered Raskolnikov.
“Excuse me, excuse me; of course it would be rather difficult for Katerina
Ivanovna to understand, but do you know that in Paris they have been
conducting serious experiments as to the possibility of curing the insane, simply
by logical argument? One professor there, a scientific man of standing, lately
dead, believed in the possibility of such treatment. His idea was that there’s
nothing really wrong with the physical organism of the insane, and that insanity
is, so to say, a logical mistake, an error of judgment, an incorrect view of things.
He gradually showed the madman his error and, would you believe it, they say
he was successful? But as he made use of douches too, how far success was due
to that treatment remains uncertain.... So it seems at least.”
Raskolnikov had long ceased to listen. Reaching the house where he lived, he
nodded to Lebeziatnikov and went in at the gate. Lebeziatnikov woke up with a
start, looked about him and hurried on.
Raskolnikov went into his little room and stood still in the middle of it. Why
had he come back here? He looked at the yellow and tattered paper, at the dust,
at his sofa.... From the yard came a loud continuous knocking; someone seemed
to be hammering... He went to the window, rose on tiptoe and looked out into the
yard for a long time with an air of absorbed attention. But the yard was empty
and he could not see who was hammering. In the house on the left he saw some
open windows; on the window-sills were pots of sickly-looking geraniums.
Linen was hung out of the windows... He knew it all by heart. He turned away
and sat down on the sofa.
Never, never had he felt himself so fearfully alone!
Yes, he felt once more that he would perhaps come to hate Sonia, now that he
had made her more miserable.
“Why had he gone to her to beg for her tears? What need had he to poison her
life? Oh, the meanness of it!”
“I will remain alone,” he said resolutely, “and she shall not come to the
prison!”