“As you will! Let anyone who likes search her!” cried Katerina Ivanovna.
“Sonia, turn out your pockets! See! Look, monster, the pocket is empty, here was
her handkerchief! Here is the other pocket, look! D’you see, d’you see?”
And Katerina Ivanovna turned—or rather snatched—both pockets inside out.
But from the right pocket a piece of paper flew out and describing a parabola in
the air fell at Luzhin’s feet. Everyone saw it, several cried out. Pyotr Petrovitch
stooped down, picked up the paper in two fingers, lifted it where all could see it
and opened it. It was a hundred-rouble note folded in eight. Pyotr Petrovitch held
up the note showing it to everyone.
“Thief! Out of my lodging. Police, police!” yelled Amalia Ivanovna. “They
must to Siberia be sent! Away!”
Exclamations arose on all sides. Raskolnikov was silent, keeping his eyes
fixed on Sonia, except for an occasional rapid glance at Luzhin. Sonia stood still,
as though unconscious. She was hardly able to feel surprise. Suddenly the colour
rushed to her cheeks; she uttered a cry and hid her face in her hands.
“No, it wasn’t I! I didn’t take it! I know nothing about it,” she cried with a
heartrending wail, and she ran to Katerina Ivanovna, who clasped her tightly in
her arms, as though she would shelter her from all the world.
“Sonia! Sonia! I don’t believe it! You see, I don’t believe it!” she cried in the
face of the obvious fact, swaying her to and fro in her arms like a baby, kissing
her face continually, then snatching at her hands and kissing them, too, “you
took it! How stupid these people are! Oh dear! You are fools, fools,” she cried,
addressing the whole room, “you don’t know, you don’t know what a heart she
has, what a girl she is! She take it, she? She’d sell her last rag, she’d go barefoot
to help you if you needed it, that’s what she is! She has the yellow passport
because my children were starving, she sold herself for us! Ah, husband,
husband! Do you see? Do you see? What a memorial dinner for you! Merciful
heavens! Defend her, why are you all standing still? Rodion Romanovitch, why
don’t you stand up for her? Do you believe it, too? You are not worth her little
finger, all of you together! Good God! Defend her now, at least!”
The wail of the poor, consumptive, helpless woman seemed to produce a great
effect on her audience. The agonised, wasted, consumptive face, the parched
blood-stained lips, the hoarse voice, the tears unrestrained as a child’s, the
trustful, childish and yet despairing prayer for help were so piteous that everyone
seemed to feel for her. Pyotr Petrovitch at any rate was at once moved to
compassion.