“Ach, Rodya, you have been upset again!... But what did he say, what did he
come for?”
Raskolnikov did not answer. Razumihin thought a minute.
“Now let me tell you my story,” he began, “I came to you, you were asleep.
Then we had dinner and then I went to Porfiry’s, Zametov was still with him. I
tried to begin, but it was no use. I couldn’t speak in the right way. They don’t
seem to understand and can’t understand, but are not a bit ashamed. I drew
Porfiry to the window, and began talking to him, but it was still no use. He
looked away and I looked away. At last I shook my fist in his ugly face, and told
him as a cousin I’d brain him. He merely looked at me, I cursed and came away.
That was all. It was very stupid. To Zametov I didn’t say a word. But, you see, I
thought I’d made a mess of it, but as I went downstairs a brilliant idea struck me:
why should we trouble? Of course if you were in any danger or anything, but
why need you care? You needn’t care a hang for them. We shall have a laugh at
them afterwards, and if I were in your place I’d mystify them more than ever.
How ashamed they’ll be afterwards! Hang them! We can thrash them afterwards,
but let’s laugh at them now!”
“To be sure,” answered Raskolnikov. “But what will you say to-morrow?” he
thought to himself. Strange to say, till that moment it had never occurred to him
to wonder what Razumihin would think when he knew. As he thought it,
Raskolnikov looked at him. Razumihin’s account of his visit to Porfiry had very
little interest for him, so much had come and gone since then.
In the corridor they came upon Luzhin; he had arrived punctually at eight, and
was looking for the number, so that all three went in together without greeting or
looking at one another. The young men walked in first, while Pyotr Petrovitch,
for good manners, lingered a little in the passage, taking off his coat. Pulcheria
Alexandrovna came forward at once to greet him in the doorway, Dounia was
welcoming her brother. Pyotr Petrovitch walked in and quite amiably, though
with redoubled dignity, bowed to the ladies. He looked, however, as though he
were a little put out and could not yet recover himself. Pulcheria Alexandrovna,
who seemed also a little embarrassed, hastened to make them all sit down at the
round table where a samovar was boiling. Dounia and Luzhin were facing one
another on opposite sides of the table. Razumihin and Raskolnikov were facing
Pulcheria Alexandrovna, Razumihin was next to Luzhin and Raskolnikov was
beside his sister. 
