Raskolnikov thought a minute.
“Listen, Porfiry Petrovitch. You said just now you have nothing but
psychology to go on, yet now you’ve gone on mathematics. Well, what if you are
mistaken yourself, now?”
“No, Rodion Romanovitch, I am not mistaken. I have a little fact even then,
Providence sent it me.”
“What little fact?”
“I won’t tell you what, Rodion Romanovitch. And in any case, I haven’t the
right to put it off any longer, I must arrest you. So think it over: it makes no
difference to me now and so I speak only for your sake. Believe me, it will be
better, Rodion Romanovitch.”
Raskolnikov smiled malignantly.
“That’s not simply ridiculous, it’s positively shameless. Why, even if I were
guilty, which I don’t admit, what reason should I have to confess, when you tell
me yourself that I shall be in greater safety in prison?”
“Ah, Rodion Romanovitch, don’t put too much faith in words, perhaps prison
will not be altogether a restful place. That’s only theory and my theory, and what
authority am I for you? Perhaps, too, even now I am hiding something from you?
I can’t lay bare everything, he-he! And how can you ask what advantage? Don’t
you know how it would lessen your sentence? You would be confessing at a
moment when another man has taken the crime on himself and so has muddled
the whole case. Consider that! I swear before God that I will so arrange that your
confession shall come as a complete surprise. We will make a clean sweep of all
these psychological points, of a suspicion against you, so that your crime will
appear to have been something like an aberration, for in truth it was an
aberration. I am an honest man, Rodion Romanovitch, and will keep my word.”
Raskolnikov maintained a mournful silence and let his head sink dejectedly.
He pondered a long while and at last smiled again, but his smile was sad and
gentle.
“No!” he said, apparently abandoning all attempt to keep up appearances with
Porfiry, “it’s not worth it, I don’t care about lessening the sentence!”
“That’s just what I was afraid of!” Porfiry cried warmly and, as it seemed,
involuntarily. “That’s just what I feared, that you wouldn’t care about the
mitigation of sentence.”
Raskolnikov looked sadly and expressively at him.
“Ah, don’t disdain life!” Porfiry went on. “You have a great deal of it still
before you. How can you say you don’t want a mitigation of sentence? You are
an impatient fellow!”
“A great deal of what lies before me?”