A thick milky mist hung over the town. Svidrigaïlov walked along the slippery
dirty wooden pavement towards the Little Neva. He was picturing the waters of
the Little Neva swollen in the night, Petrovsky Island, the wet paths, the wet
grass, the wet trees and bushes and at last the bush.... He began ill-humouredly
staring at the houses, trying to think of something else. There was not a cabman
or a passer-by in the street. The bright yellow, wooden, little houses looked dirty
and dejected with their closed shutters. The cold and damp penetrated his whole
body and he began to shiver. From time to time he came across shop signs and
read each carefully. At last he reached the end of the wooden pavement and
came to a big stone house. A dirty, shivering dog crossed his path with its tail
between its legs. A man in a greatcoat lay face downwards; dead drunk, across
the pavement. He looked at him and went on. A high tower stood up on the left.
“Bah!” he shouted, “here is a place. Why should it be Petrovsky? It will be in the
presence of an official witness anyway....”
He almost smiled at this new thought and turned into the street where there
was the big house with the tower. At the great closed gates of the house, a little
man stood with his shoulder leaning against them, wrapped in a grey soldier’s
coat, with a copper Achilles helmet on his head. He cast a drowsy and indifferent
glance at Svidrigaïlov. His face wore that perpetual look of peevish dejection,
which is so sourly printed on all faces of Jewish race without exception. They
both, Svidrigaïlov and Achilles, stared at each other for a few minutes without
speaking. At last it struck Achilles as irregular for a man not drunk to be
standing three steps from him, staring and not saying a word.
“What do you want here?” he said, without moving or changing his position.
“Nothing, brother, good morning,” answered Svidrigaïlov.
“This isn’t the place.”
“I am going to foreign parts, brother.”
“To foreign parts?”
“To America.”
“America.”
Svidrigaïlov took out the revolver and cocked it. Achilles raised his eyebrows.
“I say, this is not the place for such jokes!”
“Why shouldn’t it be the place?”
“Because it isn’t.”