“Where is the key? Open the door at once, at once, base man!”
“I have lost the key and cannot find it.”
“This is an outrage,” cried Dounia, turning pale as death. She rushed to the
furthest corner, where she made haste to barricade herself with a little table.
She did not scream, but she fixed her eyes on her tormentor and watched
every movement he made.
Svidrigaïlov remained standing at the other end of the room facing her. He
was positively composed, at least in appearance, but his face was pale as before.
The mocking smile did not leave his face.
“You spoke of outrage just now, Avdotya Romanovna. In that case you may be
sure I’ve taken measures. Sofya Semyonovna is not at home. The Kapernaumovs
are far away—there are five locked rooms between. I am at least twice as strong
as you are and I have nothing to fear, besides. For you could not complain
afterwards. You surely would not be willing actually to betray your brother?
Besides, no one would believe you. How should a girl have come alone to visit a
solitary man in his lodgings? So that even if you do sacrifice your brother, you
could prove nothing. It is very difficult to prove an assault, Avdotya
Romanovna.”
“Scoundrel!” whispered Dounia indignantly.
“As you like, but observe I was only speaking by way of a general
proposition. It’s my personal conviction that you are perfectly right—violence is
hateful. I only spoke to show you that you need have no remorse even if... you
were willing to save your brother of your own accord, as I suggest to you. You
would be simply submitting to circumstances, to violence, in fact, if we must use
that word. Think about it. Your brother’s and your mother’s fate are in your
hands. I will be your slave... all my life... I will wait here.”
Svidrigaïlov sat down on the sofa about eight steps from Dounia. She had not
the slightest doubt now of his unbending determination. Besides, she knew him.
Suddenly she pulled out of her pocket a revolver, cocked it and laid it in her
hand on the table. Svidrigaïlov jumped up.
“Aha! So that’s it, is it?” he cried, surprised but smiling maliciously. “Well,
that completely alters the aspect of affairs. You’ve made things wonderfully
easier for me, Avdotya Romanovna. But where did you get the revolver? Was it
Mr. Razumihin? Why, it’s my revolver, an old friend! And how I’ve hunted for
it! The shooting lessons I’ve given you in the country have not been thrown
away.”