A sudden anguish oppressed his heart, he stood still in the middle of the street
and began looking about to see where he was and which way he was going. He
found himself in X. Prospect, thirty or forty paces from the Hay Market, through
which he had come. The whole second storey of the house on the left was used
as a tavern. All the windows were wide open; judging from the figures moving
at the windows, the rooms were full to overflowing. There were sounds of
singing, of clarionet and violin, and the boom of a Turkish drum. He could hear
women shrieking. He was about to turn back wondering why he had come to the
X. Prospect, when suddenly at one of the end windows he saw Svidrigaïlov,
sitting at a tea-table right in the open window with a pipe in his mouth.
Raskolnikov was dreadfully taken aback, almost terrified. Svidrigaïlov was
silently watching and scrutinising him and, what struck Raskolnikov at once,
seemed to be meaning to get up and slip away unobserved. Raskolnikov at once
pretended not to have seen him, but to be looking absent-mindedly away, while
he watched him out of the corner of his eye. His heart was beating violently. Yet,
it was evident that Svidrigaïlov did not want to be seen. He took the pipe out of
his mouth and was on the point of concealing himself, but as he got up and
moved back his chair, he seemed to have become suddenly aware that
Raskolnikov had seen him, and was watching him. What had passed between
them was much the same as what happened at their first meeting in
Raskolnikov’s room. A sly smile came into Svidrigaïlov’s face and grew broader
and broader. Each knew that he was seen and watched by the other. At last
Svidrigaïlov broke into a loud laugh.
“Well, well, come in if you want me; I am here!” he shouted from the window.
Raskolnikov went up into the tavern. He found Svidrigaïlov in a tiny back
room, adjoining the saloon in which merchants, clerks and numbers of people of
all sorts were drinking tea at twenty little tables to the desperate bawling of a
chorus of singers. The click of billiard balls could be heard in the distance. On
the table before Svidrigaïlov stood an open bottle and a glass half full of
champagne. In the room he found also a boy with a little hand organ, a healthylooking
red-cheeked girl of eighteen, wearing a tucked-up striped skirt, and a
Tyrolese hat with ribbons. In spite of the chorus in the other room, she was
singing some servants’ hall song in a rather husky contralto, to the
accompaniment of the organ.