He walked along quietly and sedately, without hurry, to avoid awakening
suspicion. He scarcely looked at the passers-by, tried to escape looking at their
faces at all, and to be as little noticeable as possible. Suddenly he thought of his
hat. “Good heavens! I had the money the day before yesterday and did not get a
cap to wear instead!” A curse rose from the bottom of his soul.
Glancing out of the corner of his eye into a shop, he saw by a clock on the
wall that it was ten minutes past seven. He had to make haste and at the same
time to go someway round, so as to approach the house from the other side....
When he had happened to imagine all this beforehand, he had sometimes
thought that he would be very much afraid. But he was not very much afraid
now, was not afraid at all, indeed. His mind was even occupied by irrelevant
matters, but by nothing for long. As he passed the Yusupov garden, he was
deeply absorbed in considering the building of great fountains, and of their
refreshing effect on the atmosphere in all the squares. By degrees he passed to
the conviction that if the summer garden were extended to the field of Mars, and
perhaps joined to the garden of the Mihailovsky Palace, it would be a splendid
thing and a great benefit to the town. Then he was interested by the question why
in all great towns men are not simply driven by necessity, but in some peculiar
way inclined to live in those parts of the town where there are no gardens nor
fountains; where there is most dirt and smell and all sorts of nastiness. Then his
own walks through the Hay Market came back to his mind, and for a moment he
waked up to reality. “What nonsense!” he thought, “better think of nothing at
all!”
“So probably men led to execution clutch mentally at every object that meets
them on the way,” flashed through his mind, but simply flashed, like lightning;
he made haste to dismiss this thought.... And by now he was near; here was the
house, here was the gate. Suddenly a clock somewhere struck once. “What! can
it be half-past seven? Impossible, it must be fast!”
Luckily for him, everything went well again at the gates. At that very moment,
as though expressly for his benefit, a huge waggon of hay had just driven in at
the gate, completely screening him as he passed under the gateway, and the
waggon had scarcely had time to drive through into the yard, before he had
slipped in a flash to the right. On the other side of the waggon he could hear
shouting and quarrelling; but no one noticed him and no one met him. Many
windows looking into that huge quadrangular yard were open at that moment,
but he did not raise his head—he had not the strength to. The staircase leading to
the old woman’s room was close by, just on the right of the gateway. He was
already on the stairs.... 
