All this time Lebeziatnikov had stood at the window or walked about the
room, anxious not to interrupt the conversation; when Sonia had gone he walked
up to Pyotr Petrovitch and solemnly held out his hand.
“I heard and saw everything,” he said, laying stress on the last verb. “That is
honourable, I mean to say, it’s humane! You wanted to avoid gratitude, I saw!
And although I cannot, I confess, in principle sympathise with private charity,
for it not only fails to eradicate the evil but even promotes it, yet I must admit
that I saw your action with pleasure—yes, yes, I like it.”
“That’s all nonsense,” muttered Pyotr Petrovitch, somewhat disconcerted,
looking carefully at Lebeziatnikov.
“No, it’s not nonsense! A man who has suffered distress and annoyance as you
did yesterday and who yet can sympathise with the misery of others, such a
man... even though he is making a social mistake—is still deserving of respect! I
did not expect it indeed of you, Pyotr Petrovitch, especially as according to your
ideas... oh, what a drawback your ideas are to you! How distressed you are for
instance by your ill-luck yesterday,” cried the simple-hearted Lebeziatnikov, who
felt a return of affection for Pyotr Petrovitch. “And, what do you want with
marriage, with legal marriage, my dear, noble Pyotr Petrovitch? Why do you
cling to this legality of marriage? Well, you may beat me if you like, but I am
glad, positively glad it hasn’t come off, that you are free, that you are not quite
lost for humanity.... you see, I’ve spoken my mind!”
“Because I don’t want in your free marriage to be made a fool of and to bring
up another man’s children, that’s why I want legal marriage,” Luzhin replied in
order to make some answer.
He seemed preoccupied by something.
“Children? You referred to children,” Lebeziatnikov started off like a
warhorse at the trumpet call. “Children are a social question and a question of
first importance, I agree; but the question of children has another solution. Some
refuse to have children altogether, because they suggest the institution of the
family. We’ll speak of children later, but now as to the question of honour, I
confess that’s my weak point. That horrid, military, Pushkin expression is
unthinkable in the dictionary of the future. What does it mean indeed? It’s
nonsense, there will be no deception in a free marriage! That is only the natural
consequence of a legal marriage, so to say, its corrective, a protest. So that
indeed it’s not humiliating... and if I ever, to suppose an absurdity, were to be
legally married, I should be positively glad of it. I should say to my wife: ‘My
dear, hitherto I have loved you, now I respect you, for you’ve shown you can
protest!’ You laugh! That’s because you are incapable of getting away from
prejudices. Confound it all! I understand now where the unpleasantness is of
being deceived in a legal marriage, but it’s simply a despicable consequence of a
despicable position in which both are humiliated. When the deception is open, as
in a free marriage, then it does not exist, it’s unthinkable. Your wife will only
prove how she respects you by considering you incapable of opposing her
happiness and avenging yourself on her for her new husband. Damn it all! I
sometimes dream if I were to be married, pfoo! I mean if I were to marry, legally
or not, it’s just the same, I should present my wife with a lover if she had not
found one for herself. ‘My dear,’ I should say, ‘I love you, but even more than
that I desire you to respect me. See!’ Am I not right?”