He wondered at himself. Razumihin was one of his old comrades at the
university. It was remarkable that Raskolnikov had hardly any friends at the
university; he kept aloof from everyone, went to see no one, and did not
welcome anyone who came to see him, and indeed everyone soon gave him up.
He took no part in the students’ gatherings, amusements or conversations. He
worked with great intensity without sparing himself, and he was respected for
this, but no one liked him. He was very poor, and there was a sort of haughty
pride and reserve about him, as though he were keeping something to himself.
He seemed to some of his comrades to look down upon them all as children, as
though he were superior in development, knowledge and convictions, as though
their beliefs and interests were beneath him.
With Razumihin he had got on, or, at least, he was more unreserved and
communicative with him. Indeed it was impossible to be on any other terms with
Razumihin. He was an exceptionally good-humoured and candid youth, goodnatured to the point of simplicity, though both depth and dignity lay concealed
under that simplicity. The better of his comrades understood this, and all were
fond of him. He was extremely intelligent, though he was certainly rather a
simpleton at times. He was of striking appearance—tall, thin, blackhaired and
always badly shaved. He was sometimes uproarious and was reputed to be of
great physical strength. One night, when out in a festive company, he had with
one blow laid a gigantic policeman on his back. There was no limit to his
drinking powers, but he could abstain from drink altogether; he sometimes went
too far in his pranks; but he could do without pranks altogether. Another thing
striking about Razumihin, no failure distressed him, and it seemed as though no
unfavourable circumstances could crush him. He could lodge anywhere, and
bear the extremes of cold and hunger. He was very poor, and kept himself
entirely on what he could earn by work of one sort or another. He knew of no
end of resources by which to earn money. He spent one whole winter without
lighting his stove, and used to declare that he liked it better, because one slept
more soundly in the cold. For the present he, too, had been obliged to give up the
university, but it was only for a time, and he was working with all his might to
save enough to return to his studies again. Raskolnikov had not been to see him
for the last four months, and Razumihin did not even know his address. About
two months before, they had met in the street, but Raskolnikov had turned away
and even crossed to the other side that he might not be observed. And though
Razumihin noticed him, he passed him by, as he did not want to annoy him. 
