“He is well, quite well!” Zossimov cried cheerfully as they entered.
He had come in ten minutes earlier and was sitting in the same place as
before, on the sofa. Raskolnikov was sitting in the opposite corner, fully dressed
and carefully washed and combed, as he had not been for some time past. The
room was immediately crowded, yet Nastasya managed to follow the visitors in
and stayed to listen.
Raskolnikov really was almost well, as compared with his condition the day
before, but he was still pale, listless, and sombre. He looked like a wounded man
or one who has undergone some terrible physical suffering. His brows were
knitted, his lips compressed, his eyes feverish. He spoke little and reluctantly, as
though performing a duty, and there was a restlessness in his movements.
He only wanted a sling on his arm or a bandage on his finger to complete the
impression of a man with a painful abscess or a broken arm. The pale, sombre
face lighted up for a moment when his mother and sister entered, but this only
gave it a look of more intense suffering, in place of its listless dejection. The
light soon died away, but the look of suffering remained, and Zossimov,
watching and studying his patient with all the zest of a young doctor beginning
to practise, noticed in him no joy at the arrival of his mother and sister, but a sort
of bitter, hidden determination to bear another hour or two of inevitable torture.
He saw later that almost every word of the following conversation seemed to
touch on some sore place and irritate it. But at the same time he marvelled at the
power of controlling himself and hiding his feelings in a patient who the
previous day had, like a monomaniac, fallen into a frenzy at the slightest word.
“Yes, I see myself now that I am almost well,” said Raskolnikov, giving his
mother and sister a kiss of welcome which made Pulcheria Alexandrovna radiant
at once. “And I don’t say this as I did yesterday,” he said, addressing Razumihin,
with a friendly pressure of his hand.
“Yes, indeed, I am quite surprised at him to-day,” began Zossimov, much
delighted at the ladies’ entrance, for he had not succeeded in keeping up a
conversation with his patient for ten minutes. “In another three or four days, if he
goes on like this, he will be just as before, that is, as he was a month ago, or
two... or perhaps even three. This has been coming on for a long while.... eh?
Confess, now, that it has been perhaps your own fault?” he added, with a
tentative smile, as though still afraid of irritating him.
 
