As soon as the tin bell tinkled, Raskolnikov seemed to be aware of something
moving in the room. For some seconds he listened quite seriously. The unknown
rang again, waited and suddenly tugged violently and impatiently at the handle
of the door. Raskolnikov gazed in horror at the hook shaking in its fastening, and
in blank terror expected every minute that the fastening would be pulled out. It
certainly did seem possible, so violently was he shaking it. He was tempted to
hold the fastening, but he might be aware of it. A giddiness came over him again.
“I shall fall down!” flashed through his mind, but the unknown began to speak
and he recovered himself at once.
“What’s up? Are they asleep or murdered? D-damn them!” he bawled in a
thick voice, “Hey, Alyona Ivanovna, old witch! Lizaveta Ivanovna, hey, my
beauty! open the door! Oh, damn them! Are they asleep or what?”
And again, enraged, he tugged with all his might a dozen times at the bell. He
must certainly be a man of authority and an intimate acquaintance.
At this moment light hurried steps were heard not far off, on the stairs.
Someone else was approaching. Raskolnikov had not heard them at first.
“You don’t say there’s no one at home,” the new-comer cried in a cheerful,
ringing voice, addressing the first visitor, who still went on pulling the bell.
“Good evening, Koch.”
“From his voice he must be quite young,” thought Raskolnikov.
“Who the devil can tell? I’ve almost broken the lock,” answered Koch. “But
how do you come to know me?”
“Why! The day before yesterday I beat you three times running at billiards at
Gambrinus’.”
“Oh!”
“So they are not at home? That’s queer. It’s awfully stupid though. Where
could the old woman have gone? I’ve come on business.”
“Yes; and I have business with her, too.”
“Well, what can we do? Go back, I suppose, Aie—aie! And I was hoping to
get some money!” cried the young man.
“We must give it up, of course, but what did she fix this time for? The old
witch fixed the time for me to come herself. It’s out of my way. And where the
devil she can have got to, I can’t make out. She sits here from year’s end to
year’s end, the old hag; her legs are bad and yet here all of a sudden she is out
for a walk!” 
