“Madam, madam, this incident does not reflect upon you!” he cried
impressively, “no one would take upon himself to accuse you of being an
instigator or even an accomplice in it, especially as you have proved her guilt by
turning out her pockets, showing that you had no previous idea of it. I am most
ready, most ready to show compassion, if poverty, so to speak, drove Sofya
Semyonovna to it, but why did you refuse to confess, mademoiselle? Were you
afraid of the disgrace? The first step? You lost your head, perhaps? One can
quite understand it.... But how could you have lowered yourself to such an
action? Gentlemen,” he addressed the whole company, “gentlemen!
Compassionate and, so to say, commiserating these people, I am ready to
overlook it even now in spite of the personal insult lavished upon me! And may
this disgrace be a lesson to you for the future,” he said, addressing Sonia, “and I
will carry the matter no further. Enough!”
Pyotr Petrovitch stole a glance at Raskolnikov. Their eyes met, and the fire in
Raskolnikov’s seemed ready to reduce him to ashes. Meanwhile Katerina
Ivanovna apparently heard nothing. She was kissing and hugging Sonia like a
madwoman. The children, too, were embracing Sonia on all sides, and Polenka
—though she did not fully understand what was wrong—was drowned in tears
and shaking with sobs, as she hid her pretty little face, swollen with weeping, on
Sonia’s shoulder.
“How vile!” a loud voice cried suddenly in the doorway.
Pyotr Petrovitch looked round quickly.
“What vileness!” Lebeziatnikov repeated, staring him straight in the face.
Pyotr Petrovitch gave a positive start—all noticed it and recalled it afterwards.
Lebeziatnikov strode into the room.
“And you dared to call me as witness?” he said, going up to Pyotr Petrovitch.
“What do you mean? What are you talking about?” muttered Luzhin.
“I mean that you... are a slanderer, that’s what my words mean!”
Lebeziatnikov said hotly, looking sternly at him with his short-sighted eyes.
He was extremely angry. Raskolnikov gazed intently at him, as though seizing
and weighing each word. Again there was a silence. Pyotr Petrovitch indeed
seemed almost dumbfounded for the first moment.
“If you mean that for me,...” he began, stammering. “But what’s the matter
with you? Are you out of your mind?”
“I’m in my mind, but you are a scoundrel! Ah, how vile! I have heard
everything. I kept waiting on purpose to understand it, for I must own even now
it is not quite logical.... What you have done it all for I can’t understand.”