“Of life. What sort of prophet are you, do you know much about it? Seek and
ye shall find. This may be God’s means for bringing you to Him. And it’s not for
ever, the bondage....”
“The time will be shortened,” laughed Raskolnikov.
“Why, is it the bourgeois disgrace you are afraid of? It may be that you are
afraid of it without knowing it, because you are young! But anyway you
shouldn’t be afraid of giving yourself up and confessing.”
“Ach, hang it!” Raskolnikov whispered with loathing and contempt, as though
he did not want to speak aloud.
He got up again as though he meant to go away, but sat down again in evident
despair.
“Hang it, if you like! You’ve lost faith and you think that I am grossly
flattering you; but how long has your life been? How much do you understand?
You made up a theory and then were ashamed that it broke down and turned out
to be not at all original! It turned out something base, that’s true, but you are not
hopelessly base. By no means so base! At least you didn’t deceive yourself for
long, you went straight to the furthest point at one bound. How do I regard you?
I regard you as one of those men who would stand and smile at their torturer
while he cuts their entrails out, if only they have found faith or God. Find it and
you will live. You have long needed a change of air. Suffering, too, is a good
thing. Suffer! Maybe Nikolay is right in wanting to suffer. I know you don’t
believe in it—but don’t be over-wise; fling yourself straight into life, without
deliberation; don’t be afraid—the flood will bear you to the bank and set you
safe on your feet again. What bank? How can I tell? I only believe that you have
long life before you. I know that you take all my words now for a set speech
prepared beforehand, but maybe you will remember them after. They may be of
use some time. That’s why I speak. It’s as well that you only killed the old
woman. If you’d invented another theory you might perhaps have done
something a thousand times more hideous. You ought to thank God, perhaps.
How do you know? Perhaps God is saving you for something. But keep a good
heart and have less fear! Are you afraid of the great expiation before you? No, it
would be shameful to be afraid of it. Since you have taken such a step, you must
harden your heart. There is justice in it. You must fulfil the demands of justice. I
know that you don’t believe it, but indeed, life will bring you through. You will
live it down in time. What you need now is fresh air, fresh air, fresh air!”