“And it’s insulting, insulting! I understand you. But... since we have spoken
openly now (and it is an excellent thing that we have at last—I am glad) I will
own now frankly that I noticed it in them long ago, this idea. Of course the
merest hint only—an insinuation—but why an insinuation even? How dare they?
What foundation have they? If only you knew how furious I have been. Think
only! Simply because a poor student, unhinged by poverty and hypochondria, on
the eve of a severe delirious illness (note that), suspicious, vain, proud, who has
not seen a soul to speak to for six months, in rags and in boots without soles, has
to face some wretched policemen and put up with their insolence; and the
unexpected debt thrust under his nose, the I.O.U. presented by Tchebarov, the
new paint, thirty degrees Reaumur and a stifling atmosphere, a crowd of people,
the talk about the murder of a person where he had been just before, and all that
on an empty stomach—he might well have a fainting fit! And that, that is what
they found it all on! Damn them! I understand how annoying it is, but in your
place, Rodya, I would laugh at them, or better still, spit in their ugly faces, and
spit a dozen times in all directions. I’d hit out in all directions, neatly too, and so
I’d put an end to it. Damn them! Don’t be downhearted. It’s a shame!”
“He really has put it well, though,” Raskolnikov thought.
“Damn them? But the cross-examination again, to-morrow?” he said with
bitterness. “Must I really enter into explanations with them? I feel vexed as it is,
that I condescended to speak to Zametov yesterday in the restaurant....”
“Damn it! I will go myself to Porfiry. I will squeeze it out of him, as one of
the family: he must let me know the ins and outs of it all! And as for Zametov...”
“At last he sees through him!” thought Raskolnikov.
“Stay!” cried Razumihin, seizing him by the shoulder again. “Stay! you were
wrong. I have thought it out. You are wrong! How was that a trap? You say that
the question about the workmen was a trap. But if you had done that, could you
have said you had seen them painting the flat... and the workmen? On the
contrary, you would have seen nothing, even if you had seen it. Who would own
it against himself?”
“If I had done that thing, I should certainly have said that I had seen the
workmen and the flat,” Raskolnikov answered, with reluctance and obvious
disgust.
“But why speak against yourself?”
“Because only peasants, or the most inexperienced novices deny everything
flatly at examinations. If a man is ever so little developed and experienced, he
will certainly try to admit all the external facts that can’t be avoided, but will
seek other explanations of them, will introduce some special, unexpected turn,
that will give them another significance and put them in another light. Porfiry
might well reckon that I should be sure to answer so, and say I had seen them to
give an air of truth, and then make some explanation.”
 
