He suddenly paused in his reflection and stood still.
“It shall not be? But what are you going to do to prevent it? You’ll forbid it?
And what right have you? What can you promise them on your side to give you
such a right? Your whole life, your whole future, you will devote to them when
you have finished your studies and obtained a post? Yes, we have heard all that
before, and that’s all words, but now? Now something must be done, now, do
you understand that? And what are you doing now? You are living upon them.
They borrow on their hundred roubles pension. They borrow from the
Svidrigaïlovs. How are you going to save them from Svidrigaïlovs, from
Afanasy Ivanovitch Vahrushin, oh, future millionaire Zeus who would arrange
their lives for them? In another ten years? In another ten years, mother will be
blind with knitting shawls, maybe with weeping too. She will be worn to a
shadow with fasting; and my sister? Imagine for a moment what may have
become of your sister in ten years? What may happen to her during those ten
years? Can you fancy?”
So he tortured himself, fretting himself with such questions, and finding a
kind of enjoyment in it. And yet all these questions were not new ones suddenly
confronting him, they were old familiar aches. It was long since they had first
begun to grip and rend his heart. Long, long ago his present anguish had its first
beginnings; it had waxed and gathered strength, it had matured and concentrated,
until it had taken the form of a fearful, frenzied and fantastic question, which
tortured his heart and mind, clamouring insistently for an answer. Now his
mother’s letter had burst on him like a thunderclap. It was clear that he must not
now suffer passively, worrying himself over unsolved questions, but that he must
do something, do it at once, and do it quickly. Anyway he must decide on
something, or else...
“Or throw up life altogether!” he cried suddenly, in a frenzy—“accept one’s
lot humbly as it is, once for all and stifle everything in oneself, giving up all
claim to activity, life and love!”
“Do you understand, sir, do you understand what it means when you have
absolutely nowhere to turn?” Marmeladov’s question came suddenly into his
mind, “for every man must have somewhere to turn....” 
