“What am I to do now, Dmitri Prokofitch?” began Pulcheria Alexandrovna,
almost weeping. “How can I ask Rodya not to come? Yesterday he insisted so
earnestly on our refusing Pyotr Petrovitch and now we are ordered not to receive
Rodya! He will come on purpose if he knows, and... what will happen then?”
“Act on Avdotya Romanovna’s decision,” Razumihin answered calmly at
once.
“Oh, dear me! She says... goodness knows what she says, she doesn’t explain
her object! She says that it would be best, at least, not that it would be best, but
that it’s absolutely necessary that Rodya should make a point of being here at
eight o’clock and that they must meet.... I didn’t want even to show him the
letter, but to prevent him from coming by some stratagem with your help...
because he is so irritable.... Besides I don’t understand about that drunkard who
died and that daughter, and how he could have given the daughter all the
money... which...”
“Which cost you such sacrifice, mother,” put in Avdotya Romanovna.
“He was not himself yesterday,” Razumihin said thoughtfully, “if you only
knew what he was up to in a restaurant yesterday, though there was sense in it
too.... Hm! He did say something, as we were going home yesterday evening,
about a dead man and a girl, but I didn’t understand a word.... But last night, I
myself...”
“The best thing, mother, will be for us to go to him ourselves and there I
assure you we shall see at once what’s to be done. Besides, it’s getting late—
good heavens, it’s past ten,” she cried looking at a splendid gold enamelled
watch which hung round her neck on a thin Venetian chain, and looked entirely
out of keeping with the rest of her dress. “A present from her fiancé,” thought
Razumihin.
“We must start, Dounia, we must start,” her mother cried in a flutter. “He will
be thinking we are still angry after yesterday, from our coming so late. Merciful
heavens!”
While she said this she was hurriedly putting on her hat and mantle; Dounia,
too, put on her things. Her gloves, as Razumihin noticed, were not merely
shabby but had holes in them, and yet this evident poverty gave the two ladies an
air of special dignity, which is always found in people who know how to wear
poor clothes. Razumihin looked reverently at Dounia and felt proud of escorting
her. “The queen who mended her stockings in prison,” he thought, “must have
looked then every inch a queen and even more a queen than at sumptuous
banquets and levées.”
“My God!” exclaimed Pulcheria Alexandrovna, “little did I think that I should
ever fear seeing my son, my darling, darling Rodya! I am afraid, Dmitri
Prokofitch,” she added, glancing at him timidly.
“Don’t be afraid, mother,” said Dounia, kissing her, “better have faith in him.”
“Oh, dear, I have faith in him, but I haven’t slept all night,” exclaimed the
poor woman. 
