“But I think, if you would not do it yourself, there’s no justice about it.... Let
us have another game.”
Raskolnikov was violently agitated. Of course, it was all ordinary youthful
talk and thought, such as he had often heard before in different forms and on
different themes. But why had he happened to hear such a discussion and such
ideas at the very moment when his own brain was just conceiving... the very
same ideas? And why, just at the moment when he had brought away the embryo
of his idea from the old woman had he dropped at once upon a conversation
about her? This coincidence always seemed strange to him. This trivial talk in a
tavern had an immense influence on him in his later action; as though there had
really been in it something preordained, some guiding hint....
On returning from the Hay Market he flung himself on the sofa and sat for a
whole hour without stirring. Meanwhile it got dark; he had no candle and,
indeed, it did not occur to him to light up. He could never recollect whether he
had been thinking about anything at that time. At last he was conscious of his
former fever and shivering, and he realised with relief that he could lie down on
the sofa. Soon heavy, leaden sleep came over him, as it were crushing him.
He slept an extraordinarily long time and without dreaming. Nastasya, coming
into his room at ten o’clock the next morning, had difficulty in rousing him. She
brought him in tea and bread. The tea was again the second brew and again in
her own tea-pot.
“My goodness, how he sleeps!” she cried indignantly. “And he is always
asleep.”
He got up with an effort. His head ached, he stood up, took a turn in his garret
and sank back on the sofa again.
“Going to sleep again,” cried Nastasya. “Are you ill, eh?”
He made no reply.
“Do you want some tea?”
“Afterwards,” he said with an effort, closing his eyes again and turning to the
wall.
Nastasya stood over him.
“Perhaps he really is ill,” she said, turned and went out. She came in again at
two o’clock with soup. He was lying as before. The tea stood untouched.
Nastasya felt positively offended and began wrathfully rousing him.
 
