Very much?”
“Very much!”
“All right then. This is how I should behave,” Raskolnikov began, again
bringing his face close to Zametov’s, again staring at him and speaking in a
whisper, so that the latter positively shuddered. “This is what I should have done.
I should have taken the money and jewels, I should have walked out of there and
have gone straight to some deserted place with fences round it and scarcely
anyone to be seen, some kitchen garden or place of that sort. I should have
looked out beforehand some stone weighing a hundredweight or more which had
been lying in the corner from the time the house was built. I would lift that stone
—there would sure to be a hollow under it, and I would put the jewels and
money in that hole. Then I’d roll the stone back so that it would look as before,
would press it down with my foot and walk away. And for a year or two, three
maybe, I would not touch it. And, well, they could search! There’d be no trace.”
“You are a madman,” said Zametov, and for some reason he too spoke in a
whisper, and moved away from Raskolnikov, whose eyes were glittering. He had
turned fearfully pale and his upper lip was twitching and quivering. He bent
down as close as possible to Zametov, and his lips began to move without
uttering a word. This lasted for half a minute; he knew what he was doing, but
could not restrain himself. The terrible word trembled on his lips, like the latch
on that door; in another moment it will break out, in another moment he will let
it go, he will speak out.
“And what if it was I who murdered the old woman and Lizaveta?” he said
suddenly and—realised what he had done.
Zametov looked wildly at him and turned white as the tablecloth. His face
wore a contorted smile.
“But is it possible?” he brought out faintly. Raskolnikov looked wrathfully at
him.
“Own up that you believed it, yes, you did?”
“Not a bit of it, I believe it less than ever now,” Zametov cried hastily.
“I’ve caught my cock-sparrow! So you did believe it before, if now you
believe less than ever?”
“Not at all,” cried Zametov, obviously embarrassed. “Have you been
frightening me so as to lead up to this?”
“You don’t believe it then? What were you talking about behind my back
when I went out of the police-office? And why did the explosive lieutenant
question me after I fainted? Hey, there,” he shouted to the waiter, getting up and
taking his cap, “how much?”
 
