Meanwhile Katerina Ivanovna had regained her breath. The bleeding ceased
for a time. She looked with sick but intent and penetrating eyes at Sonia, who
stood pale and trembling, wiping the sweat from her brow with a handkerchief.
At last she asked to be raised. They sat her up on the bed, supporting her on both
sides.
“Where are the children?” she said in a faint voice. “You’ve brought them,
Polenka? Oh the sillies! Why did you run away.... Och!”
Once more her parched lips were covered with blood. She moved her eyes,
looking about her.
“So that’s how you live, Sonia! Never once have I been in your room.”
She looked at her with a face of suffering.
“We have been your ruin, Sonia. Polenka, Lida, Kolya, come here! Well, here
they are, Sonia, take them all! I hand them over to you, I’ve had enough! The
ball is over.” (Cough!) “Lay me down, let me die in peace.”
They laid her back on the pillow.
“What, the priest? I don’t want him. You haven’t got a rouble to spare. I have
no sins. God must forgive me without that. He knows how I have suffered....
And if He won’t forgive me, I don’t care!”
She sank more and more into uneasy delirium. At times she shuddered, turned
her eyes from side to side, recognised everyone for a minute, but at once sank
into delirium again. Her breathing was hoarse and difficult, there was a sort of
rattle in her throat.
“I said to him, your excellency,” she ejaculated, gasping after each word.
“That Amalia Ludwigovna, ah! Lida, Kolya, hands on your hips, make haste!
Glissez, glissez! pas de basque! Tap with your heels, be a graceful child!
“Du hast Diamanten und Perlen
“What next? That’s the thing to sing.
“Du hast die schönsten Augen Mädchen, was willst du mehr?
“What an idea! Was willst du mehr? What things the fool invents! Ah, yes!
“In the heat of midday in the vale of Dagestan.
“Ah, how I loved it! I loved that song to distraction, Polenka! Your father, you
know, used to sing it when we were engaged.... Oh those days! Oh that’s the
thing for us to sing! How does it go? I’ve forgotten. Remind me! How was it?”
She was violently excited and tried to sit up. At last, in a horribly hoarse,
broken voice, she began, shrieking and gasping at every word, with a look of
growing terror.