“You keep on like that because you are out of humour yourself.... But that’s
nonsense and it has nothing, nothing whatever to do with the woman question!
You don’t understand; I used to think, indeed, that if women are equal to men in
all respects, even in strength (as is maintained now) there ought to be equality in
that, too. Of course, I reflected afterwards that such a question ought not really
to arise, for there ought not to be fighting and in the future society fighting is
unthinkable... and that it would be a queer thing to seek for equality in fighting. I
am not so stupid... though, of course, there is fighting... there won’t be later, but
at present there is... confound it! How muddled one gets with you! It’s not on
that account that I am not going. I am not going on principle, not to take part in
the revolting convention of memorial dinners, that’s why! Though, of course,
one might go to laugh at it.... I am sorry there won’t be any priests at it. I should
certainly go if there were.”
“Then you would sit down at another man’s table and insult it and those who
invited you. Eh?”
“Certainly not insult, but protest. I should do it with a good object. I might
indirectly assist the cause of enlightenment and propaganda. It’s a duty of every
man to work for enlightenment and propaganda and the more harshly, perhaps,
the better. I might drop a seed, an idea.... And something might grow up from
that seed. How should I be insulting them? They might be offended at first, but
afterwards they’d see I’d done them a service. You know, Terebyeva (who is in
the community now) was blamed because when she left her family and...
devoted... herself, she wrote to her father and mother that she wouldn’t go on
living conventionally and was entering on a free marriage and it was said that
that was too harsh, that she might have spared them and have written more
kindly. I think that’s all nonsense and there’s no need of softness; on the
contrary, what’s wanted is protest. Varents had been married seven years, she
abandoned her two children, she told her husband straight out in a letter: ‘I have
realised that I cannot be happy with you. I can never forgive you that you have
deceived me by concealing from me that there is another organisation of society
by means of the communities. I have only lately learned it from a great-hearted
man to whom I have given myself and with whom I am establishing a
community. I speak plainly because I consider it dishonest to deceive you. Do as
you think best. Do not hope to get me back, you are too late.