And, indeed, if it had ever happened that everything to the least point could
have been considered and finally settled, and no uncertainty of any kind had
remained, he would, it seems, have renounced it all as something absurd,
monstrous and impossible. But a whole mass of unsettled points and
uncertainties remained. As for getting the axe, that trifling business cost him no
anxiety, for nothing could be easier. Nastasya was continually out of the house,
especially in the evenings; she would run in to the neighbours or to a shop, and
always left the door ajar. It was the one thing the landlady was always scolding
her about. And so, when the time came, he would only have to go quietly into
the kitchen and to take the axe, and an hour later (when everything was over) go
in and put it back again. But these were doubtful points. Supposing he returned
an hour later to put it back, and Nastasya had come back and was on the spot. He
would of course have to go by and wait till she went out again. But supposing
she were in the meantime to miss the axe, look for it, make an outcry—that
would mean suspicion or at least grounds for suspicion.
But those were all trifles which he had not even begun to consider, and indeed
he had no time. He was thinking of the chief point, and put off trifling details,
until he could believe in it all. But that seemed utterly unattainable. So it seemed
to himself at least. He could not imagine, for instance, that he would sometime
leave off thinking, get up and simply go there.... Even his late experiment (i.e.
his visit with the object of a final survey of the place) was simply an attempt at
an experiment, far from being the real thing, as though one should say “come, let
us go and try it—why dream about it!”—and at once he had broken down and
had run away cursing, in a frenzy with himself. Meanwhile it would seem, as
regards the moral question, that his analysis was complete; his casuistry had
become keen as a razor, and he could not find rational objections in himself. But
in the last resort he simply ceased to believe in himself, and doggedly, slavishly
sought arguments in all directions, fumbling for them, as though someone were
forcing and drawing him to it.
At first—long before indeed—he had been much occupied with one question;
why almost all crimes are so badly concealed and so easily detected, and why
almost all criminals leave such obvious traces? He had come gradually to many
different and curious conclusions, and in his opinion the chief reason lay not so
much in the material impossibility of concealing the crime, as in the criminal
himself. Almost every criminal is subject to a failure of will and reasoning
power by a childish and phenomenal heedlessness, at the very instant when
prudence and caution are most essential. It was his conviction that this eclipse of
reason and failure of will power attacked a man like a disease, developed
gradually and reached its highest point just before the perpetration of the crime,
continued with equal violence at the moment of the crime and for longer or
shorter time after, according to the individual case, and then passed off like any
other disease. The question whether the disease gives rise to the crime, or
whether the crime from its own peculiar nature is always accompanied by
something of the nature of disease, he did not yet feel able to decide. 
