“Don’t let me find a trace of you in my room! Kindly leave at once, and
everything is at an end between us! When I think of the trouble I’ve been taking,
the way I’ve been expounding... all this fortnight!”
“I told you myself to-day that I was going, when you tried to keep me; now I
will simply add that you are a fool. I advise you to see a doctor for your brains
and your short sight. Let me pass, gentlemen!”
He forced his way through. But the commissariat clerk was unwilling to let
him off so easily: he picked up a glass from the table, brandished it in the air and
flung it at Pyotr Petrovitch; but the glass flew straight at Amalia Ivanovna. She
screamed, and the clerk, overbalancing, fell heavily under the table. Pyotr
Petrovitch made his way to his room and half an hour later had left the house.
Sonia, timid by nature, had felt before that day that she could be ill-treated more
easily than anyone, and that she could be wronged with impunity. Yet till that
moment she had fancied that she might escape misfortune by care, gentleness
and submissiveness before everyone. Her disappointment was too great. She
could, of course, bear with patience and almost without murmur anything, even
this. But for the first minute she felt it too bitter. In spite of her triumph and her
justification—when her first terror and stupefaction had passed and she could
understand it all clearly—the feeling of her helplessness and of the wrong done
to her made her heart throb with anguish and she was overcome with hysterical
weeping. At last, unable to bear any more, she rushed out of the room and ran
home, almost immediately after Luzhin’s departure. When amidst loud laughter
the glass flew at Amalia Ivanovna, it was more than the landlady could endure.
With a shriek she rushed like a fury at Katerina Ivanovna, considering her to
blame for everything.
“Out of my lodgings! At once! Quick march!”
And with these words she began snatching up everything she could lay her
hands on that belonged to Katerina Ivanovna, and throwing it on the floor.
Katerina Ivanovna, pale, almost fainting, and gasping for breath, jumped up
from the bed where she had sunk in exhaustion and darted at Amalia Ivanovna.
But the battle was too unequal: the landlady waved her away like a feather.
“What! As though that godless calumny was not enough—this vile creature
attacks me! What! On the day of my husband’s funeral I am turned out of my
lodging! After eating my bread and salt she turns me into the street, with my
orphans! Where am I to go?” wailed the poor woman, sobbing and gasping.
“Good God!” she cried with flashing eyes, “is there no justice upon earth?
Whom should you protect if not us orphans? We shall see! There is law and
justice on earth, there is, I will find it! Wait a bit, godless creature! Polenka, stay
with the children, I’ll come back. Wait for me, if you have to wait in the street.
We will see whether there is justice on earth!”
And throwing over her head that green shawl which Marmeladov had
mentioned to Raskolnikov, Katerina Ivanovna squeezed her way through the
disorderly and drunken crowd of lodgers who still filled the room, and, wailing
and tearful, she ran into the street—with a vague intention of going at once
somewhere to find justice. Polenka with the two little ones in her arms crouched,
terrified, on the trunk in the corner of the room, where she waited trembling for
her mother to come back. Amalia Ivanovna raged about the room, shrieking,
lamenting and throwing everything she came across on the floor. The lodgers
talked incoherently, some commented to the best of their ability on what had
happened, others quarrelled and swore at one another, while others struck up a
song.