Though Lebeziatnikov was so good-natured, he, too, was beginning to dislike
Pyotr Petrovitch. This happened on both sides unconsciously. However simple
Andrey Semyonovitch might be, he began to see that Pyotr Petrovitch was
duping him and secretly despising him, and that “he was not the right sort of
man.” He had tried expounding to him the system of Fourier and the Darwinian
theory, but of late Pyotr Petrovitch began to listen too sarcastically and even to
be rude. The fact was he had begun instinctively to guess that Lebeziatnikov was
not merely a commonplace simpleton, but, perhaps, a liar, too, and that he had
no connections of any consequence even in his own circle, but had simply
picked things up third-hand; and that very likely he did not even know much
about his own work of propaganda, for he was in too great a muddle. A fine
person he would be to show anyone up! It must be noted, by the way, that Pyotr
Petrovitch had during those ten days eagerly accepted the strangest praise from
Andrey Semyonovitch; he had not protested, for instance, when Andrey
Semyonovitch belauded him for being ready to contribute to the establishment of
the new “commune,” or to abstain from christening his future children, or to
acquiesce if Dounia were to take a lover a month after marriage, and so on. Pyotr
Petrovitch so enjoyed hearing his own praises that he did not disdain even such
virtues when they were attributed to him.
Pyotr Petrovitch had had occasion that morning to realise some five-per-cent
bonds and now he sat down to the table and counted over bundles of notes.
Andrey Semyonovitch who hardly ever had any money walked about the room
pretending to himself to look at all those bank notes with indifference and even
contempt. Nothing would have convinced Pyotr Petrovitch that Andrey
Semyonovitch could really look on the money unmoved, and the latter, on his
side, kept thinking bitterly that Pyotr Petrovitch was capable of entertaining such
an idea about him and was, perhaps, glad of the opportunity of teasing his young
friend by reminding him of his inferiority and the great difference between them.
He found him incredibly inattentive and irritable, though he, Andrey
Semyonovitch, began enlarging on his favourite subject, the foundation of a new
special “commune.” The brief remarks that dropped from Pyotr Petrovitch
between the clicking of the beads on the reckoning frame betrayed unmistakable
and discourteous irony. But the “humane” Andrey Semyonovitch ascribed Pyotr
Petrovitch’s ill-humour to his recent breach with Dounia and he was burning
with impatience to discourse on that theme. He had something progressive to say
on the subject which might console his worthy friend and “could not fail” to
promote his development.