He was a man about fifty, rather tall and thickly set, with broad high shoulders
which made him look as though he stooped a little. He wore good and
fashionable clothes, and looked like a gentleman of position. He carried a
handsome cane, which he tapped on the pavement at each step; his gloves were
spotless. He had a broad, rather pleasant face with high cheek-bones and a fresh
colour, not often seen in Petersburg. His flaxen hair was still abundant, and only
touched here and there with grey, and his thick square beard was even lighter
than his hair. His eyes were blue and had a cold and thoughtful look; his lips
were crimson. He was a remarkedly well-preserved man and looked much
younger than his years.
When Sonia came out on the canal bank, they were the only two persons on
the pavement. He observed her dreaminess and preoccupation. On reaching the
house where she lodged, Sonia turned in at the gate; he followed her, seeming
rather surprised. In the courtyard she turned to the right corner. “Bah!” muttered
the unknown gentleman, and mounted the stairs behind her. Only then Sonia
noticed him. She reached the third storey, turned down the passage, and rang at
No. 9. On the door was inscribed in chalk, “Kapernaumov, Tailor.” “Bah!” the
stranger repeated again, wondering at the strange coincidence, and he rang next
door, at No. 8. The doors were two or three yards apart.
“You lodge at Kapernaumov’s,” he said, looking at Sonia and laughing. “He
altered a waistcoat for me yesterday. I am staying close here at Madame
Resslich’s. How odd!” Sonia looked at him attentively.
“We are neighbours,” he went on gaily. “I only came to town the day before
yesterday. Good-bye for the present.”
Sonia made no reply; the door opened and she slipped in. She felt for some
reason ashamed and uneasy.
On the way to Porfiry’s, Razumihin was obviously excited.
“That’s capital, brother,” he repeated several times, “and I am glad! I am
glad!”
“What are you glad about?” Raskolnikov thought to himself.
“I didn’t know that you pledged things at the old woman’s, too. And... was it
long ago? I mean, was it long since you were there?”
“What a simple-hearted fool he is!” 
