At last the thought struck him that it might be better to go to the Neva. There
were not so many people there, he would be less observed, and it would be more
convenient in every way, above all it was further off. He wondered how he could
have been wandering for a good half-hour, worried and anxious in this
dangerous past without thinking of it before. And that half-hour he had lost over
an irrational plan, simply because he had thought of it in delirium! He had
become extremely absent and forgetful and he was aware of it. He certainly must
make haste.
He walked towards the Neva along V—— Prospect, but on the way another
idea struck him. “Why to the Neva? Would it not be better to go somewhere far
off, to the Islands again, and there hide the things in some solitary place, in a
wood or under a bush, and mark the spot perhaps?” And though he felt incapable
of clear judgment, the idea seemed to him a sound one. But he was not destined
to go there. For coming out of V—— Prospect towards the square, he saw on the
left a passage leading between two blank walls to a courtyard. On the right hand,
the blank unwhitewashed wall of a four-storied house stretched far into the
court; on the left, a wooden hoarding ran parallel with it for twenty paces into
the court, and then turned sharply to the left. Here was a deserted fenced-off
place where rubbish of different sorts was lying. At the end of the court, the
corner of a low, smutty, stone shed, apparently part of some workshop, peeped
from behind the hoarding. It was probably a carriage builder’s or carpenter’s
shed; the whole place from the entrance was black with coal dust. Here would be
the place to throw it, he thought. Not seeing anyone in the yard, he slipped in,
and at once saw near the gate a sink, such as is often put in yards where there are
many workmen or cab-drivers; and on the hoarding above had been scribbled in
chalk the time-honoured witticism, “Standing here strictly forbidden.” This was
all the better, for there would be nothing suspicious about his going in. “Here I
could throw it all in a heap and get away!”
Looking round once more, with his hand already in his pocket, he noticed
against the outer wall, between the entrance and the sink, a big unhewn stone,
weighing perhaps sixty pounds. The other side of the wall was a street. He could
hear passers-by, always numerous in that part, but he could not be seen from the
entrance, unless someone came in from the street, which might well happen
indeed, so there was need of haste.
He bent down over the stone, seized the top of it firmly in both hands, and
using all his strength turned it over. Under the stone was a small hollow in the
ground, and he immediately emptied his pocket into it. The purse lay at the top,
and yet the hollow was not filled up. Then he seized the stone again and with
one twist turned it back, so that it was in the same position again, though it stood
a very little higher. But he scraped the earth about it and pressed it at the edges
with his foot. Nothing could be noticed.
 
