Raskolnikov sat seeming not to pay attention, plunged in thought with a
strange smile on his pale lips. He was still meditating on something.
“Well, what about the man who was run over? I interrupted you!” Razumihin
cried hastily.
“What?” Raskolnikov seemed to wake up. “Oh... I got spattered with blood
helping to carry him to his lodging. By the way, mamma, I did an unpardonable
thing yesterday. I was literally out of my mind. I gave away all the money you
sent me... to his wife for the funeral. She’s a widow now, in consumption, a poor
creature... three little children, starving... nothing in the house... there’s a
daughter, too... perhaps you’d have given it yourself if you’d seen them. But I
had no right to do it I admit, especially as I knew how you needed the money
yourself. To help others one must have the right to do it, or else Crevez, chiens,
si vous n’êtes pas contents.” He laughed, “That’s right, isn’t it, Dounia?”
“No, it’s not,” answered Dounia firmly.
“Bah! you, too, have ideals,” he muttered, looking at her almost with hatred,
and smiling sarcastically. “I ought to have considered that.... Well, that’s
praiseworthy, and it’s better for you... and if you reach a line you won’t overstep,
you will be unhappy... and if you overstep it, maybe you will be still unhappier....
But all that’s nonsense,” he added irritably, vexed at being carried away. “I only
meant to say that I beg your forgiveness, mother,” he concluded, shortly and
abruptly.
“That’s enough, Rodya, I am sure that everything you do is very good,” said
his mother, delighted.
“Don’t be too sure,” he answered, twisting his mouth into a smile.
A silence followed. There was a certain constraint in all this conversation, and
in the silence, and in the reconciliation, and in the forgiveness, and all were
feeling it.
“It is as though they were afraid of me,” Raskolnikov was thinking to himself,
looking askance at his mother and sister. Pulcheria Alexandrovna was indeed
growing more timid the longer she kept silent.
“Yet in their absence I seemed to love them so much,” flashed through his
mind.
“Do you know, Rodya, Marfa Petrovna is dead,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna
suddenly blurted out.
“What Marfa Petrovna?”
 
