Raskolnikov looked gloomily at him.
“You are not a bear, perhaps, at all,” he said. “I fancy indeed that you are a
man of very good breeding, or at least know how on occasion to behave like
one.”
“I am not particularly interested in anyone’s opinion,” Svidrigaïlov answered,
dryly and even with a shade of haughtiness, “and therefore why not be vulgar at
times when vulgarity is such a convenient cloak for our climate... and especially
if one has a natural propensity that way,” he added, laughing again.
“But I’ve heard you have many friends here. You are, as they say, ‘not without
connections.’ What can you want with me, then, unless you’ve some special
object?”
“That’s true that I have friends here,” Svidrigaïlov admitted, not replying to
the chief point. “I’ve met some already. I’ve been lounging about for the last
three days, and I’ve seen them, or they’ve seen me. That’s a matter of course. I
am well dressed and reckoned not a poor man; the emancipation of the serfs
hasn’t affected me; my property consists chiefly of forests and water meadows.
The revenue has not fallen off; but... I am not going to see them, I was sick of
them long ago. I’ve been here three days and have called on no one.... What a
town it is! How has it come into existence among us, tell me that? A town of
officials and students of all sorts. Yes, there’s a great deal I didn’t notice when I
was here eight years ago, kicking up my heels.... My only hope now is in
anatomy, by Jove, it is!”
“Anatomy?”
“But as for these clubs, Dussauts, parades, or progress, indeed, maybe—well,
all that can go on without me,” he went on, again without noticing the question.
“Besides, who wants to be a card-sharper?”
“Why, have you been a card-sharper then?”
“How could I help being? There was a regular set of us, men of the best
society, eight years ago; we had a fine time. And all men of breeding, you know,
poets, men of property. And indeed as a rule in our Russian society the best
manners are found among those who’ve been thrashed, have you noticed that?
I’ve deteriorated in the country. But I did get into prison for debt, through a low
Greek who came from Nezhin. Then Marfa Petrovna turned up; she bargained
with him and bought me off for thirty thousand silver pieces (I owed seventy
thousand). We were united in lawful wedlock and she bore me off into the
country like a treasure. You know she was five years older than I. She was very
fond of me. For seven years I never left the country. And, take note, that all my
life she held a document over me, the IOU for thirty thousand roubles, so if I
were to elect to be restive about anything I should be trapped at once! And she
would have done it! Women find nothing incompatible in that.” 
