 
He was wearing an old
and hopelessly ragged black dress coat, with all its buttons missing except one,
and that one he had buttoned, evidently clinging to this last trace of
respectability. A crumpled shirt front, covered with spots and stains, protruded
from his canvas waistcoat. Like a clerk, he wore no beard, nor moustache, but
had been so long unshaven that his chin looked like a stiff greyish brush. And
there was something respectable and like an official about his manner too. But
he was restless; he ruffled up his hair and from time to time let his head drop into
his hands dejectedly resting his ragged elbows on the stained and sticky table. At
last he looked straight at Raskolnikov, and said loudly and resolutely:
“May I venture, honoured sir, to engage you in polite conversation?
Forasmuch as, though your exterior would not command respect, my experience
admonishes me that you are a man of education and not accustomed to drinking.
I have always respected education when in conjunction with genuine sentiments,
and I am besides a titular counsellor in rank. Marmeladov—such is my name;
titular counsellor. I make bold to inquire—have you been in the service?”
“No, I am studying,” answered the young man, somewhat surprised at the
grandiloquent style of the speaker and also at being so directly addressed. In
spite of the momentary desire he had just been feeling for company of any sort,
on being actually spoken to he felt immediately his habitual irritable and uneasy
aversion for any stranger who approached or attempted to approach him.
“A student then, or formerly a student,” cried the clerk. “Just what I thought!
I’m a man of experience, immense experience, sir,” and he tapped his forehead
with his fingers in self-approval. “You’ve been a student or have attended some
learned institution!... But allow me....” He got up, staggered, took up his jug and
glass, and sat down beside the young man, facing him a little sideways. He was
drunk, but spoke fluently and boldly, only occasionally losing the thread of his
sentences and drawling his words. He pounced upon Raskolnikov as greedily as
though he too had not spoken to a soul for a month.
