“I won’t drink anything,” said Raskolnikov.
“As you like, I didn’t mean it for you. Drink, Katia! I don’t want anything
more to-day, you can go.” He poured her out a full glass, and laid down a yellow
note.
Katia drank off her glass of wine, as women do, without putting it down, in
twenty gulps, took the note and kissed Svidrigaïlov’s hand, which he allowed
quite seriously. She went out of the room and the boy trailed after her with the
organ. Both had been brought in from the street. Svidrigaïlov had not been a
week in Petersburg, but everything about him was already, so to speak, on a
patriarchal footing; the waiter, Philip, was by now an old friend and very
obsequious.
The door leading to the saloon had a lock on it. Svidrigaïlov was at home in
this room and perhaps spent whole days in it. The tavern was dirty and wretched,
not even second-rate.
“I was going to see you and looking for you,” Raskolnikov began, “but I don’t
know what made me turn from the Hay Market into the X. Prospect just now. I
never take this turning. I turn to the right from the Hay Market. And this isn’t the
way to you. I simply turned and here you are. It is strange!”
“Why don’t you say at once ‘it’s a miracle’?”
“Because it may be only chance.”
“Oh, that’s the way with all you folk,” laughed Svidrigaïlov. “You won’t admit
it, even if you do inwardly believe it a miracle! Here you say that it may be only
chance. And what cowards they all are here, about having an opinion of their
own, you can’t fancy, Rodion Romanovitch. I don’t mean you, you have an
opinion of your own and are not afraid to have it. That’s how it was you attracted
my curiosity.”
“Nothing else?”
“Well, that’s enough, you know,” Svidrigaïlov was obviously exhilarated, but
only slightly so, he had not had more than half a glass of wine.
“I fancy you came to see me before you knew that I was capable of having
what you call an opinion of my own,” observed Raskolnikov.
“Oh, well, it was a different matter. Everyone has his own plans. And apropos
of the miracle let me tell you that I think you have been asleep for the last two or
three days. I told you of this tavern myself, there is no miracle in your coming
straight here. I explained the way myself, told you where it was, and the hours
you could find me here. Do you remember?”
“I don’t remember,” answered Raskolnikov with surprise.