“I... I... have come for one minute. Forgive me for disturbing you,” she began
falteringly. “I come from Katerina Ivanovna, and she had no one to send.
Katerina Ivanovna told me to beg you... to be at the service... in the morning... at
Mitrofanievsky... and then... to us... to her... to do her the honour... she told me to
beg you...” Sonia stammered and ceased speaking.
“I will try, certainly, most certainly,” answered Raskolnikov. He, too, stood up,
and he, too, faltered and could not finish his sentence. “Please sit down,” he said,
suddenly. “I want to talk to you. You are perhaps in a hurry, but please, be so
kind, spare me two minutes,” and he drew up a chair for her.
Sonia sat down again, and again timidly she took a hurried, frightened look at
the two ladies, and dropped her eyes. Raskolnikov’s pale face flushed, a shudder
passed over him, his eyes glowed.
“Mother,” he said, firmly and insistently, “this is Sofya Semyonovna
Marmeladov, the daughter of that unfortunate Mr. Marmeladov, who was run
over yesterday before my eyes, and of whom I was just telling you.”
Pulcheria Alexandrovna glanced at Sonia, and slightly screwed up her eyes. In
spite of her embarrassment before Rodya’s urgent and challenging look, she
could not deny herself that satisfaction. Dounia gazed gravely and intently into
the poor girl’s face, and scrutinised her with perplexity. Sonia, hearing herself
introduced, tried to raise her eyes again, but was more embarrassed than ever.
“I wanted to ask you,” said Raskolnikov, hastily, “how things were arranged
yesterday. You were not worried by the police, for instance?”
“No, that was all right... it was too evident, the cause of death... they did not
worry us... only the lodgers are angry.”
“Why?”
“At the body’s remaining so long. You see it is hot now. So that, to-day, they
will carry it to the cemetery, into the chapel, until to-morrow. At first Katerina
Ivanovna was unwilling, but now she sees herself that it’s necessary...”
“To-day, then?”
“She begs you to do us the honour to be in the church to-morrow for the
service, and then to be present at the funeral lunch.”
“She is giving a funeral lunch?”
“Yes... just a little.... She told me to thank you very much for helping us
yesterday. But for you, we should have had nothing for the funeral.”
All at once her lips and chin began trembling, but, with an effort, she
controlled herself, looking down again.
 
