He brought Avdotya Romanovna back into his sitting-room and offered her a
chair. He sat down at the opposite side of the table, at least seven feet from her,
but probably there was the same glow in his eyes which had once frightened
Dounia so much. She shuddered and once more looked about her distrustfully. It
was an involuntary gesture; she evidently did not wish to betray her uneasiness.
But the secluded position of Svidrigaïlov’s lodging had suddenly struck her. She
wanted to ask whether his landlady at least were at home, but pride kept her
from asking. Moreover, she had another trouble in her heart incomparably
greater than fear for herself. She was in great distress.
“Here is your letter,” she said, laying it on the table. “Can it be true what you
write? You hint at a crime committed, you say, by my brother. You hint at it too
clearly; you daren’t deny it now. I must tell you that I’d heard of this stupid story
before you wrote and don’t believe a word of it. It’s a disgusting and ridiculous
suspicion. I know the story and why and how it was invented. You can have no
proofs. You promised to prove it. Speak! But let me warn you that I don’t
believe you! I don’t believe you!”
Dounia said this, speaking hurriedly, and for an instant the colour rushed to
her face.
“If you didn’t believe it, how could you risk coming alone to my rooms? Why
have you come? Simply from curiosity?”
“Don’t torment me. Speak, speak!”
“There’s no denying that you are a brave girl. Upon my word, I thought you
would have asked Mr. Razumihin to escort you here. But he was not with you
nor anywhere near. I was on the look-out. It’s spirited of you, it proves you
wanted to spare Rodion Romanovitch. But everything is divine in you.... About
your brother, what am I to say to you? You’ve just seen him yourself. What did
you think of him?”
“Surely that’s not the only thing you are building on?”
“No, not on that, but on his own words. He came here on two successive
evenings to see Sofya Semyonovna. I’ve shown you where they sat. He made a
full confession to her. He is a murderer. He killed an old woman, a pawnbroker,
with whom he had pawned things himself. He killed her sister too, a pedlar
woman called Lizaveta, who happened to come in while he was murdering her
sister. He killed them with an axe he brought with him. He murdered them to rob
them and he did rob them. He took money and various things.... He told all this,
word for word, to Sofya Semyonovna, the only person who knows his secret.
But she has had no share by word or deed in the murder; she was as horrified at
it as you are now. Don’t be anxious, she won’t betray him.”