“Why, you gave your address to Polenka yesterday.”
“Polenka? Oh, yes; Polenka, that is the little girl. She is your sister? Did I give
her the address?”
“Why, had you forgotten?”
“No, I remember.”
“I had heard my father speak of you... only I did not know your name, and he
did not know it. And now I came... and as I had learnt your name, I asked to-day,
‘Where does Mr. Raskolnikov live?’ I did not know you had only a room too....
Good-bye, I will tell Katerina Ivanovna.”
She was extremely glad to escape at last; she went away looking down,
hurrying to get out of sight as soon as possible, to walk the twenty steps to the
turning on the right and to be at last alone, and then moving rapidly along,
looking at no one, noticing nothing, to think, to remember, to meditate on every
word, every detail. Never, never had she felt anything like this. Dimly and
unconsciously a whole new world was opening before her. She remembered
suddenly that Raskolnikov meant to come to her that day, perhaps at once!
“Only not to-day, please, not to-day!” she kept muttering with a sinking heart,
as though entreating someone, like a frightened child. “Mercy! to me... to that
room... he will see... oh, dear!”
She was not capable at that instant of noticing an unknown gentleman who
was watching her and following at her heels. He had accompanied her from the
gateway. At the moment when Razumihin, Raskolnikov, and she stood still at
parting on the pavement, this gentleman, who was just passing, started on
hearing Sonia’s words: “and I asked where Mr. Raskolnikov lived?” He turned a
rapid but attentive look upon all three, especially upon Raskolnikov, to whom
Sonia was speaking; then looked back and noted the house. All this was done in
an instant as he passed, and trying not to betray his interest, he walked on more
slowly as though waiting for something. He was waiting for Sonia; he saw that
they were parting, and that Sonia was going home.
“Home? Where? I’ve seen that face somewhere,” he thought. “I must find
out.”
At the turning he crossed over, looked round, and saw Sonia coming the same
way, noticing nothing. She turned the corner. He followed her on the other side.
After about fifty paces he crossed over again, overtook her and kept two or three
yards behind her.
 
