“Listen, Razumihin,” Raskolnikov began quietly, apparently calm—“can’t
you see that I don’t want your benevolence? A strange desire you have to shower
benefits on a man who... curses them, who feels them a burden in fact! Why did
you seek me out at the beginning of my illness? Maybe I was very glad to die.
Didn’t I tell you plainly enough to-day that you were torturing me, that I was...
sick of you! You seem to want to torture people! I assure you that all that is
seriously hindering my recovery, because it’s continually irritating me. You saw
Zossimov went away just now to avoid irritating me. You leave me alone too, for
goodness’ sake! What right have you, indeed, to keep me by force? Don’t you
see that I am in possession of all my faculties now? How, how can I persuade
you not to persecute me with your kindness? I may be ungrateful, I may be
mean, only let me be, for God’s sake, let me be! Let me be, let me be!”
He began calmly, gloating beforehand over the venomous phrases he was
about to utter, but finished, panting for breath, in a frenzy, as he had been with
Luzhin.
Razumihin stood a moment, thought and let his hand drop.
“Well, go to hell then,” he said gently and thoughtfully. “Stay,” he roared, as
Raskolnikov was about to move. “Listen to me. Let me tell you, that you are all
a set of babbling, posing idiots! If you’ve any little trouble you brood over it like
a hen over an egg. And you are plagiarists even in that! There isn’t a sign of
independent life in you! You are made of spermaceti ointment and you’ve lymph
in your veins instead of blood. I don’t believe in anyone of you! In any
circumstances the first thing for all of you is to be unlike a human being! Stop!”
he cried with redoubled fury, noticing that Raskolnikov was again making a
movement—“hear me out! You know I’m having a house-warming this evening,
I dare say they’ve arrived by now, but I left my uncle there—I just ran in—to
receive the guests. And if you weren’t a fool, a common fool, a perfect fool, if
you were an original instead of a translation... you see, Rodya, I recognise you’re
a clever fellow, but you’re a fool!—and if you weren’t a fool you’d come round
to me this evening instead of wearing out your boots in the street! Since you
have gone out, there’s no help for it! I’d give you a snug easy chair, my landlady
has one... a cup of tea, company.... Or you could lie on the sofa—any way you
would be with us.... Zossimov will be there too. Will you come?”
“No.”
“R-rubbish!” Razumihin shouted, out of patience. “How do you know? You
can’t answer for yourself! You don’t know anything about it.... Thousands of
times I’ve fought tooth and nail with people and run back to them afterwards....
One feels ashamed and goes back to a man! So remember, Potchinkov’s house
on the third storey....” 
