How it happened he did not know. But all at once something seemed to seize
him and fling him at her feet. He wept and threw his arms round her knees. For
the first instant she was terribly frightened and she turned pale. She jumped up
and looked at him trembling. But at the same moment she understood, and a
light of infinite happiness came into her eyes. She knew and had no doubt that he
loved her beyond everything and that at last the moment had come....
They wanted to speak, but could not; tears stood in their eyes. They were both
pale and thin; but those sick pale faces were bright with the dawn of a new
future, of a full resurrection into a new life. They were renewed by love; the
heart of each held infinite sources of life for the heart of the other.
They resolved to wait and be patient. They had another seven years to wait,
and what terrible suffering and what infinite happiness before them! But he had
risen again and he knew it and felt it in all his being, while she—she only lived
in his life.
On the evening of the same day, when the barracks were locked, Raskolnikov
lay on his plank bed and thought of her. He had even fancied that day that all the
convicts who had been his enemies looked at him differently; he had even
entered into talk with them and they answered him in a friendly way. He
remembered that now, and thought it was bound to be so. Wasn’t everything now
bound to be changed?
He thought of her. He remembered how continually he had tormented her and
wounded her heart. He remembered her pale and thin little face. But these
recollections scarcely troubled him now; he knew with what infinite love he
would now repay all her sufferings. And what were all, all the agonies of the
past! Everything, even his crime, his sentence and imprisonment, seemed to him
now in the first rush of feeling an external, strange fact with which he had no
concern. But he could not think for long together of anything that evening, and
he could not have analysed anything consciously; he was simply feeling. Life
had stepped into the place of theory and something quite different would work
itself out in his mind.