He suddenly recalled how, an hour before carrying out his design on Dounia,
he had recommended Raskolnikov to trust her to Razumihin’s keeping. “I
suppose I really did say it, as Raskolnikov guessed, to tease myself. But what a
rogue that Raskolnikov is! He’s gone through a good deal. He may be a
successful rogue in time when he’s got over his nonsense. But now he’s too
eager for life. These young men are contemptible on that point. But, hang the
fellow! Let him please himself, it’s nothing to do with me.”
He could not get to sleep. By degrees Dounia’s image rose before him, and a
shudder ran over him. “No, I must give up all that now,” he thought, rousing
himself. “I must think of something else. It’s queer and funny. I never had a great
hatred for anyone, I never particularly desired to avenge myself even, and that’s
a bad sign, a bad sign, a bad sign. I never liked quarrelling either, and never lost
my temper—that’s a bad sign too. And the promises I made her just now, too—
Damnation! But—who knows?—perhaps she would have made a new man of
me somehow....”
He ground his teeth and sank into silence again. Again Dounia’s image rose
before him, just as she was when, after shooting the first time, she had lowered
the revolver in terror and gazed blankly at him, so that he might have seized her
twice over and she would not have lifted a hand to defend herself if he had not
reminded her. He recalled how at that instant he felt almost sorry for her, how he
had felt a pang at his heart...
“Aïe! Damnation, these thoughts again! I must put it away!”
He was dozing off; the feverish shiver had ceased, when suddenly something
seemed to run over his arm and leg under the bedclothes. He started. “Ugh! hang
it! I believe it’s a mouse,” he thought, “that’s the veal I left on the table.” He felt
fearfully disinclined to pull off the blanket, get up, get cold, but all at once
something unpleasant ran over his leg again. He pulled off the blanket and
lighted the candle. Shaking with feverish chill he bent down to examine the bed:
there was nothing. He shook the blanket and suddenly a mouse jumped out on
the sheet. He tried to catch it, but the mouse ran to and fro in zigzags without
leaving the bed, slipped between his fingers, ran over his hand and suddenly
darted under the pillow. He threw down the pillow, but in one instant felt
something leap on his chest and dart over his body and down his back under his
shirt. He trembled nervously and woke up.