The morning that followed the fateful interview with Dounia and her mother
brought sobering influences to bear on Pyotr Petrovitch. Intensely unpleasant as
it was, he was forced little by little to accept as a fact beyond recall what had
seemed to him only the day before fantastic and incredible. The black snake of
wounded vanity had been gnawing at his heart all night. When he got out of bed,
Pyotr Petrovitch immediately looked in the looking-glass. He was afraid that he
had jaundice. However his health seemed unimpaired so far, and looking at his
noble, clear-skinned countenance which had grown fattish of late, Pyotr
Petrovitch for an instant was positively comforted in the conviction that he
would find another bride and, perhaps, even a better one. But coming back to the
sense of his present position, he turned aside and spat vigorously, which excited
a sarcastic smile in Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov, the young friend with
whom he was staying. That smile Pyotr Petrovitch noticed, and at once set it
down against his young friend’s account. He had set down a good many points
against him of late. His anger was redoubled when he reflected that he ought not
to have told Andrey Semyonovitch about the result of yesterday’s interview.
That was the second mistake he had made in temper, through impulsiveness and
irritability.... Moreover, all that morning one unpleasantness followed another.
He even found a hitch awaiting him in his legal case in the senate. He was
particularly irritated by the owner of the flat which had been taken in view of his
approaching marriage and was being redecorated at his own expense; the owner,
a rich German tradesman, would not entertain the idea of breaking the contract
which had just been signed and insisted on the full forfeit money, though Pyotr
Petrovitch would be giving him back the flat practically redecorated. In the same
way the upholsterers refused to return a single rouble of the instalment paid for
the furniture purchased but not yet removed to the flat.
“Am I to get married simply for the sake of the furniture?” Pyotr Petrovitch
ground his teeth and at the same time once more he had a gleam of desperate
hope. “Can all that be really so irrevocably over? Is it no use to make another
effort?” The thought of Dounia sent a voluptuous pang through his heart. He
endured anguish at that moment, and if it had been possible to slay Raskolnikov
instantly by wishing it, Pyotr Petrovitch would promptly have uttered the wish.