“That’s his notion!”
“Talked himself silly!”
“A fine clerk he is!”
And so on, and so on.
“Let us go, sir,” said Marmeladov all at once, raising his head and addressing
Raskolnikov—“come along with me... Kozel’s house, looking into the yard. I’m
going to Katerina Ivanovna—time I did.”
Raskolnikov had for some time been wanting to go and he had meant to help
him. Marmeladov was much unsteadier on his legs than in his speech and leaned
heavily on the young man. They had two or three hundred paces to go. The
drunken man was more and more overcome by dismay and confusion as they
drew nearer the house.
“It’s not Katerina Ivanovna I am afraid of now,” he muttered in agitation
—“and that she will begin pulling my hair. What does my hair matter! Bother
my hair! That’s what I say! Indeed it will be better if she does begin pulling it,
that’s not what I am afraid of... it’s her eyes I am afraid of... yes, her eyes... the
red on her cheeks, too, frightens me... and her breathing too.... Have you noticed
how people in that disease breathe... when they are excited? I am frightened of
the children’s crying, too.... For if Sonia has not taken them food... I don’t know
what’s happened! I don’t know! But blows I am not afraid of.... Know, sir, that
such blows are not a pain to me, but even an enjoyment. In fact I can’t get on
without it.... It’s better so. Let her strike me, it relieves her heart... it’s better so...
There is the house. The house of Kozel, the cabinet-maker... a German, well-todo. Lead the way!”
They went in from the yard and up to the fourth storey. The staircase got
darker and darker as they went up. It was nearly eleven o’clock and although in
summer in Petersburg there is no real night, yet it was quite dark at the top of the
stairs.
A grimy little door at the very top of the stairs stood ajar. A very poor-looking
room about ten paces long was lighted up by a candle-end; the whole of it was
visible from the entrance. It was all in disorder, littered up with rags of all sorts,
especially children’s garments. Across the furthest corner was stretched a ragged
sheet. Behind it probably was the bed. There was nothing in the room except two
chairs and a sofa covered with American leather, full of holes, before which
stood an old deal kitchen-table, unpainted and uncovered. At the edge of the
table stood a smoldering tallow-candle in an iron candlestick. It appeared that
the family had a room to themselves, not part of a room, but their room was
practically a passage. The door leading to the other rooms, or rather cupboards,
into which Amalia Lippevechsel’s flat was divided stood half open, and there
was shouting, uproar and laughter within. People seemed to be playing cards and
drinking tea there. Words of the most unceremonious kind flew out from time to
time. 
