“I’ve got to think of that,” he thought. “Excuse me, please,” he began,
affecting extreme embarrassment. “Raskolnikov.”
“Not at all, very pleasant to see you... and how pleasantly you’ve come in....
Why, won’t he even say good-morning?” Porfiry Petrovitch nodded at
Razumihin.
“Upon my honour I don’t know why he is in such a rage with me. I only told
him as we came along that he was like Romeo... and proved it. And that was all,
I think!”
“Pig!” ejaculated Razumihin, without turning round.
“There must have been very grave grounds for it, if he is so furious at the
word,” Porfiry laughed.
“Oh, you sharp lawyer!... Damn you all!” snapped Razumihin, and suddenly
bursting out laughing himself, he went up to Porfiry with a more cheerful face as
though nothing had happened. “That’ll do! We are all fools. To come to business.
This is my friend Rodion Romanovitch Raskolnikov; in the first place he has
heard of you and wants to make your acquaintance, and secondly, he has a little
matter of business with you. Bah! Zametov, what brought you here? Have you
met before? Have you known each other long?”
“What does this mean?” thought Raskolnikov uneasily.
Zametov seemed taken aback, but not very much so.
“Why, it was at your rooms we met yesterday,” he said easily.
“Then I have been spared the trouble. All last week he was begging me to
introduce him to you. Porfiry and you have sniffed each other out without me.
Where is your tobacco?”
Porfiry Petrovitch was wearing a dressing-gown, very clean linen, and
trodden-down slippers. He was a man of about five and thirty, short, stout even
to corpulence, and clean shaven. He wore his hair cut short and had a large round
head, particularly prominent at the back. His soft, round, rather snub-nosed face
was of a sickly yellowish colour, but had a vigorous and rather ironical
expression. It would have been good-natured except for a look in the eyes, which
shone with a watery, mawkish light under almost white, blinking eyelashes. The
expression of those eyes was strangely out of keeping with his somewhat
womanish figure, and gave it something far more serious than could be guessed
at first sight.
 
