“And what if there has been a search already? What if I find them in my
room?”
But here was his room. Nothing and no one in it. No one had peeped in. Even
Nastasya had not touched it. But heavens! how could he have left all those things
in the hole?
He rushed to the corner, slipped his hand under the paper, pulled the things out
and lined his pockets with them. There were eight articles in all: two little boxes
with ear-rings or something of the sort, he hardly looked to see; then four small
leather cases. There was a chain, too, merely wrapped in newspaper and
something else in newspaper, that looked like a decoration.... He put them all in
the different pockets of his overcoat, and the remaining pocket of his trousers,
trying to conceal them as much as possible. He took the purse, too. Then he went
out of his room, leaving the door open. He walked quickly and resolutely, and
though he felt shattered, he had his senses about him. He was afraid of pursuit,
he was afraid that in another half-hour, another quarter of an hour perhaps,
instructions would be issued for his pursuit, and so at all costs, he must hide all
traces before then. He must clear everything up while he still had some strength,
some reasoning power left him.... Where was he to go?
That had long been settled: “Fling them into the canal, and all traces hidden in
the water, the thing would be at an end.” So he had decided in the night of his
delirium when several times he had had the impulse to get up and go away, to
make haste, and get rid of it all. But to get rid of it, turned out to be a very
difficult task. He wandered along the bank of the Ekaterininsky Canal for half an
hour or more and looked several times at the steps running down to the water,
but he could not think of carrying out his plan; either rafts stood at the steps’
edge, and women were washing clothes on them, or boats were moored there,
and people were swarming everywhere. Moreover he could be seen and noticed
from the banks on all sides; it would look suspicious for a man to go down on
purpose, stop, and throw something into the water. And what if the boxes were
to float instead of sinking? And of course they would. Even as it was, everyone
he met seemed to stare and look round, as if they had nothing to do but to watch
him. “Why is it, or can it be my fancy?” he thought.
 
