“In fact,” continued Dounia, “I am marrying Pyotr Petrovitch because of two
evils I choose the less. I intend to do honestly all he expects of me, so I am not
deceiving him.... Why did you smile just now?” She, too, flushed, and there was
a gleam of anger in her eyes.
“All?” he asked, with a malignant grin.
“Within certain limits. Both the manner and form of Pyotr Petrovitch’s
courtship showed me at once what he wanted. He may, of course, think too well
of himself, but I hope he esteems me, too.... Why are you laughing again?”
“And why are you blushing again? You are lying, sister. You are intentionally
lying, simply from feminine obstinacy, simply to hold your own against me....
You cannot respect Luzhin. I have seen him and talked with him. So you are
selling yourself for money, and so in any case you are acting basely, and I am
glad at least that you can blush for it.”
“It is not true. I am not lying,” cried Dounia, losing her composure. “I would
not marry him if I were not convinced that he esteems me and thinks highly of
me. I would not marry him if I were not firmly convinced that I can respect him.
Fortunately, I can have convincing proof of it this very day... and such a
marriage is not a vileness, as you say! And even if you were right, if I really had
determined on a vile action, is it not merciless on your part to speak to me like
that? Why do you demand of me a heroism that perhaps you have not either? It
is despotism; it is tyranny. If I ruin anyone, it is only myself.... I am not
committing a murder. Why do you look at me like that? Why are you so pale?
Rodya, darling, what’s the matter?”
“Good heavens! You have made him faint,” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna.
“No, no, nonsense! It’s nothing. A little giddiness—not fainting. You have
fainting on the brain. H’m, yes, what was I saying? Oh, yes. In what way will
you get convincing proof to-day that you can respect him, and that he... esteems
you, as you said. I think you said to-day?”
“Mother, show Rodya Pyotr Petrovitch’s letter,” said Dounia.
With trembling hands, Pulcheria Alexandrovna gave him the letter. He took it
with great interest, but, before opening it, he suddenly looked with a sort of
wonder at Dounia.
“It is strange,” he said, slowly, as though struck by a new idea. “What am I
making such a fuss for? What is it all about? Marry whom you like!”
He said this as though to himself, but said it aloud, and looked for some time
at his sister, as though puzzled. He opened the letter at last, still with the same
look of strange wonder on his face. Then, slowly and attentively, he began
reading, and read it through twice. Pulcheria Alexandrovna showed marked
anxiety, and all indeed expected something particular.
 
