It was nearly an hour later when they heard footsteps in the corridor and
another knock at the door. Both women waited this time completely relying on
Razumihin’s promise; he actually had succeeded in bringing Zossimov.
Zossimov had agreed at once to desert the drinking party to go to Raskolnikov’s,
but he came reluctantly and with the greatest suspicion to see the ladies,
mistrusting Razumihin in his exhilarated condition. But his vanity was at once
reassured and flattered; he saw that they were really expecting him as an oracle.
He stayed just ten minutes and succeeded in completely convincing and
comforting Pulcheria Alexandrovna. He spoke with marked sympathy, but with
the reserve and extreme seriousness of a young doctor at an important
consultation. He did not utter a word on any other subject and did not display the
slightest desire to enter into more personal relations with the two ladies.
Remarking at his first entrance the dazzling beauty of Avdotya Romanovna, he
endeavoured not to notice her at all during his visit and addressed himself solely
to Pulcheria Alexandrovna. All this gave him extraordinary inward satisfaction.
He declared that he thought the invalid at this moment going on very
satisfactorily. According to his observations the patient’s illness was due partly
to his unfortunate material surroundings during the last few months, but it had
partly also a moral origin, “was, so to speak, the product of several material and
moral influences, anxieties, apprehensions, troubles, certain ideas... and so on.”
Noticing stealthily that Avdotya Romanovna was following his words with close
attention, Zossimov allowed himself to enlarge on this theme. On Pulcheria
Alexandrovna’s anxiously and timidly inquiring as to “some suspicion of
insanity,” he replied with a composed and candid smile that his words had been
exaggerated; that certainly the patient had some fixed idea, something
approaching a monomania—he, Zossimov, was now particularly studying this
interesting branch of medicine—but that it must be recollected that until to-day
the patient had been in delirium and... and that no doubt the presence of his
family would have a favourable effect on his recovery and distract his mind, “if
only all fresh shocks can be avoided,” he added significantly. Then he got up,
took leave with an impressive and affable bow, while blessings, warm gratitude,
and entreaties were showered upon him, and Avdotya Romanovna spontaneously
offered her hand to him. He went out exceedingly pleased with his visit and still
more so with himself.
“We’ll talk to-morrow; go to bed at once!” Razumihin said in conclusion,
following Zossimov out. “I’ll be with you to-morrow morning as early as
possible with my report.” 
