But Raskolnikov was already stepping into the street. On the Nikolaevsky
Bridge he was roused to full consciousness again by an unpleasant incident. A
coachman, after shouting at him two or three times, gave him a violent lash on
the back with his whip, for having almost fallen under his horses’ hoofs. The
lash so infuriated him that he dashed away to the railing (for some unknown
reason he had been walking in the very middle of the bridge in the traffic). He
angrily clenched and ground his teeth. He heard laughter, of course.
“Serves him right!”
“A pickpocket I dare say.”
“Pretending to be drunk, for sure, and getting under the wheels on purpose;
and you have to answer for him.”
“It’s a regular profession, that’s what it is.”
But while he stood at the railing, still looking angry and bewildered after the
retreating carriage, and rubbing his back, he suddenly felt someone thrust money
into his hand. He looked. It was an elderly woman in a kerchief and goatskin
shoes, with a girl, probably her daughter, wearing a hat, and carrying a green
parasol.
“Take it, my good man, in Christ’s name.”
He took it and they passed on. It was a piece of twenty copecks. From his
dress and appearance they might well have taken him for a beggar asking alms in
the streets, and the gift of the twenty copecks he doubtless owed to the blow,
which made them feel sorry for him.
He closed his hand on the twenty copecks, walked on for ten paces, and turned
facing the Neva, looking towards the palace. The sky was without a cloud and
the water was almost bright blue, which is so rare in the Neva. The cupola of the
cathedral, which is seen at its best from the bridge about twenty paces from the
chapel, glittered in the sunlight, and in the pure air every ornament on it could be
clearly distinguished. The pain from the lash went off, and Raskolnikov forgot
about it; one uneasy and not quite definite idea occupied him now completely.
He stood still, and gazed long and intently into the distance; this spot was
especially familiar to him. When he was attending the university, he had
hundreds of times—generally on his way home—stood still on this spot, gazed
at this truly magnificent spectacle and almost always marvelled at a vague and
mysterious emotion it roused in him. It left him strangely cold; this gorgeous
picture was for him blank and lifeless. He wondered every time at his sombre
and enigmatic impression and, mistrusting himself, put off finding the
explanation of it. He vividly recalled those old doubts and perplexities, and it
seemed to him that it was no mere chance that he recalled them now. It struck
him as strange and grotesque, that he should have stopped at the same spot as
before, as though he actually imagined he could think the same thoughts, be
interested in the same theories and pictures that had interested him... so short a
time ago. He felt it almost amusing, and yet it wrung his heart. Deep down,
hidden far away out of sight all that seemed to him now—all his old past, his old
thoughts, his old problems and theories, his old impressions and that picture and
himself and all, all.... He felt as though he were flying upwards, and everything
were vanishing from his sight. Making an unconscious movement with his hand,
he suddenly became aware of the piece of money in his fist. He opened his hand,
stared at the coin, and with a sweep of his arm flung it into the water; then he
turned and went home. It seemed to him, he had cut himself off from everyone
and from everything at that moment. 
