Raskolnikov recognised Katerina Ivanovna at once. She was a rather tall, slim
and graceful woman, terribly emaciated, with magnificent dark brown hair and
with a hectic flush in her cheeks. She was pacing up and down in her little room,
pressing her hands against her chest; her lips were parched and her breathing
came in nervous broken gasps. Her eyes glittered as in fever and looked about
with a harsh immovable stare. And that consumptive and excited face with the
last flickering light of the candle-end playing upon it made a sickening
impression. She seemed to Raskolnikov about thirty years old and was certainly
a strange wife for Marmeladov.... She had not heard them and did not notice
them coming in. She seemed to be lost in thought, hearing and seeing nothing.
The room was close, but she had not opened the window; a stench rose from the
staircase, but the door on to the stairs was not closed. From the inner rooms
clouds of tobacco smoke floated in, she kept coughing, but did not close the
door. The youngest child, a girl of six, was asleep, sitting curled up on the floor
with her head on the sofa. A boy a year older stood crying and shaking in the
corner, probably he had just had a beating. Beside him stood a girl of nine years
old, tall and thin, wearing a thin and ragged chemise with an ancient cashmere
pelisse flung over her bare shoulders, long outgrown and barely reaching her
knees. Her arm, as thin as a stick, was round her brother’s neck. She was trying
to comfort him, whispering something to him, and doing all she could to keep
him from whimpering again. At the same time her large dark eyes, which looked
larger still from the thinness of her frightened face, were watching her mother
with alarm. Marmeladov did not enter the door, but dropped on his knees in the
very doorway, pushing Raskolnikov in front of him. The woman seeing a
stranger stopped indifferently facing him, coming to herself for a moment and
apparently wondering what he had come for. But evidently she decided that he
was going into the next room, as he had to pass through hers to get there. Taking
no further notice of him, she walked towards the outer door to close it and
uttered a sudden scream on seeing her husband on his knees in the doorway.
“Ah!” she cried out in a frenzy, “he has come back! The criminal! the
monster!... And where is the money? What’s in your pocket, show me! And your
clothes are all different! Where are your clothes? Where is the money! Speak!”
And she fell to searching him. Marmeladov submissively and obediently held
up both arms to facilitate the search. Not a farthing was there.
“Where is the money?” she cried—“Mercy on us, can he have drunk it all?
There were twelve silver roubles left in the chest!” and in a fury she seized him
by the hair and dragged him into the room. Marmeladov seconded her efforts by
meekly crawling along on his knees.
 
