Anyway she
succeeded in completely re-establishing Dounia’s reputation and the whole
ignominy of this affair rested as an indelible disgrace upon her husband, as the
only person to blame, so that I really began to feel sorry for him; it was really
treating the crazy fellow too harshly. Dounia was at once asked to give lessons in
several families, but she refused. All of a sudden everyone began to treat her
with marked respect and all this did much to bring about the event by which, one
may say, our whole fortunes are now transformed. You must know, dear Rodya,
that Dounia has a suitor and that she has already consented to marry him. I
hasten to tell you all about the matter, and though it has been arranged without
asking your consent, I think you will not be aggrieved with me or with your
sister on that account, for you will see that we could not wait and put off our
decision till we heard from you. And you could not have judged all the facts
without being on the spot. This was how it happened. He is already of the rank
of a counsellor, Pyotr Petrovitch Luzhin, and is distantly related to Marfa
Petrovna, who has been very active in bringing the match about. It began with
his expressing through her his desire to make our acquaintance. He was properly
received, drank coffee with us and the very next day he sent us a letter in which
he very courteously made an offer and begged for a speedy and decided answer.
He is a very busy man and is in a great hurry to get to Petersburg, so that every
moment is precious to him. At first, of course, we were greatly surprised, as it
had all happened so quickly and unexpectedly. We thought and talked it over the
whole day. He is a well-to-do man, to be depended upon, he has two posts in the
government and has already made his fortune. It is true that he is forty-five years
old, but he is of a fairly prepossessing appearance and might still be thought
attractive by women, and he is altogether a very respectable and presentable
man, only he seems a little morose and somewhat conceited. But possibly that
may only be the impression he makes at first sight. And beware, dear Rodya,
when he comes to Petersburg, as he shortly will do, beware of judging him too
hastily and severely, as your way is, if there is anything you do not like in him at
first sight. I give you this warning, although I feel sure that he will make a
favourable impression upon you. Moreover, in order to understand any man one
must be deliberate and careful to avoid forming prejudices and mistaken ideas,
which are very difficult to correct and get over afterwards. And Pyotr Petrovitch,
judging by many indications, is a thoroughly estimable man. At his first visit,
indeed, he told us that he was a practical man, but still he shares, as he expressed
it, many of the convictions ‘of our most rising generation’ and he is an opponent
of all prejudices. He said a good deal more, for he seems a little conceited and
likes to be listened to, but this is scarcely a vice. 
