“There is some sort of festivity being prepared at that... at the widow’s, isn’t
there?” Pyotr Petrovitch asked suddenly, interrupting Andrey Semyonovitch at
the most interesting passage.
“Why, don’t you know? Why, I was telling you last night what I think about
all such ceremonies. And she invited you too, I heard. You were talking to her
yesterday...”
“I should never have expected that beggarly fool would have spent on this
feast all the money she got from that other fool, Raskolnikov. I was surprised
just now as I came through at the preparations there, the wines! Several people
are invited. It’s beyond everything!” continued Pyotr Petrovitch, who seemed to
have some object in pursuing the conversation. “What? You say I am asked too?
When was that? I don’t remember. But I shan’t go. Why should I? I only said a
word to her in passing yesterday of the possibility of her obtaining a year’s
salary as a destitute widow of a government clerk. I suppose she has invited me
on that account, hasn’t she? He-he-he!”
“I don’t intend to go either,” said Lebeziatnikov.
“I should think not, after giving her a thrashing! You might well hesitate, hehe!”
“Who thrashed? Whom?” cried Lebeziatnikov, flustered and blushing.
“Why, you thrashed Katerina Ivanovna a month ago. I heard so yesterday... so
that’s what your convictions amount to... and the woman question, too, wasn’t
quite sound, he-he-he!” and Pyotr Petrovitch, as though comforted, went back to
clicking his beads.
“It’s all slander and nonsense!” cried Lebeziatnikov, who was always afraid of
allusions to the subject. “It was not like that at all, it was quite different. You’ve
heard it wrong; it’s a libel. I was simply defending myself. She rushed at me first
with her nails, she pulled out all my whiskers.... It’s permissable for anyone, I
should hope, to defend himself and I never allow anyone to use violence to me
on principle, for it’s an act of despotism. What was I to do? I simply pushed her
back.”
“He-he-he!” Luzhin went on laughing maliciously.