“And will get to know each other through and through?” added Raskolnikov.
“Yes; know each other through and through,” assented Porfiry Petrovitch, and
he screwed up his eyes, looking earnestly at Raskolnikov. “Now you’re going to
a birthday party?”
“To a funeral.”
“Of course, the funeral! Take care of yourself, and get well.”
“I don’t know what to wish you,” said Raskolnikov, who had begun to
descend the stairs, but looked back again. “I should like to wish you success, but
your office is such a comical one.”
“Why comical?” Porfiry Petrovitch had turned to go, but he seemed to prick
up his ears at this.
“Why, how you must have been torturing and harassing that poor Nikolay
psychologically, after your fashion, till he confessed! You must have been at him
day and night, proving to him that he was the murderer, and now that he has
confessed, you’ll begin vivisecting him again. ‘You are lying,’ you’ll say. ‘You
are not the murderer! You can’t be! It’s not your own tale you are telling!’ You
must admit it’s a comical business!”
“He-he-he! You noticed then that I said to Nikolay just now that it was not his
own tale he was telling?”
“How could I help noticing it!”
“He-he! You are quick-witted. You notice everything! You’ve really a playful
mind! And you always fasten on the comic side... he-he! They say that was the
marked characteristic of Gogol, among the writers.”
“Yes, of Gogol.”
“Yes, of Gogol.... I shall look forward to meeting you.”
“So shall I.”
Raskolnikov walked straight home. He was so muddled and bewildered that
on getting home he sat for a quarter of an hour on the sofa, trying to collect his
thoughts. He did not attempt to think about Nikolay; he was stupefied; he felt
that his confession was something inexplicable, amazing—something beyond his
understanding. But Nikolay’s confession was an actual fact. The consequences
of this fact were clear to him at once, its falsehood could not fail to be
discovered, and then they would be after him again. Till then, at least, he was
free and must do something for himself, for the danger was imminent.