“This is what it is,” she began in haste, as though the permission to speak of
her trouble lifted a weight off her mind. “Very early this morning we got a note
from Pyotr Petrovitch in reply to our letter announcing our arrival. He promised
to meet us at the station, you know; instead of that he sent a servant to bring us
the address of these lodgings and to show us the way; and he sent a message that
he would be here himself this morning. But this morning this note came from
him. You’d better read it yourself; there is one point in it which worries me very
much... you will soon see what that is, and... tell me your candid opinion, Dmitri
Prokofitch! You know Rodya’s character better than anyone and no one can
advise us better than you can. Dounia, I must tell you, made her decision at once,
but I still don’t feel sure how to act and I... I’ve been waiting for your opinion.”
Razumihin opened the note which was dated the previous evening and read as
follows:
“Dear Madam, Pulcheria Alexandrovna, I have the honour to inform you that
owing to unforeseen obstacles I was rendered unable to meet you at the railway
station; I sent a very competent person with the same object in view. I likewise
shall be deprived of the honour of an interview with you to-morrow morning by
business in the Senate that does not admit of delay, and also that I may not
intrude on your family circle while you are meeting your son, and Avdotya
Romanovna her brother. I shall have the honour of visiting you and paying you
my respects at your lodgings not later than to-morrow evening at eight o’clock
precisely, and herewith I venture to present my earnest and, I may add,
imperative request that Rodion Romanovitch may not be present at our interview
—as he offered me a gross and unprecedented affront on the occasion of my visit
to him in his illness yesterday, and, moreover, since I desire from you personally
an indispensable and circumstantial explanation upon a certain point, in regard to
which I wish to learn your own interpretation. I have the honour to inform you,
in anticipation, that if, in spite of my request, I meet Rodion Romanovitch, I
shall be compelled to withdraw immediately and then you have only yourself to
blame. I write on the assumption that Rodion Romanovitch who appeared so ill
at my visit, suddenly recovered two hours later and so, being able to leave the
house, may visit you also. I was confirmed in that belief by the testimony of my
own eyes in the lodging of a drunken man who was run over and has since died,
to whose daughter, a young woman of notorious behaviour, he gave twenty-five
roubles on the pretext of the funeral, which gravely surprised me knowing what
pains you were at to raise that sum. Herewith expressing my special respect to
your estimable daughter, Avdotya Romanovna, I beg you to accept the respectful
homage of
“Your humble servant,
“P. LUZHIN.”
 
