But it does
not follow from that that Newton had a right to murder people right and left and
to steal every day in the market. Then, I remember, I maintain in my article that
all... well, legislators and leaders of men, such as Lycurgus, Solon, Mahomet,
Napoleon, and so on, were all without exception criminals, from the very fact
that, making a new law, they transgressed the ancient one, handed down from
their ancestors and held sacred by the people, and they did not stop short at
bloodshed either, if that bloodshed—often of innocent persons fighting bravely
in defence of ancient law—were of use to their cause. It’s remarkable, in fact,
that the majority, indeed, of these benefactors and leaders of humanity were
guilty of terrible carnage. In short, I maintain that all great men or even men a
little out of the common, that is to say capable of giving some new word, must
from their very nature be criminals—more or less, of course. Otherwise it’s hard
for them to get out of the common rut; and to remain in the common rut is what
they can’t submit to, from their very nature again, and to my mind they ought
not, indeed, to submit to it. You see that there is nothing particularly new in all
that. The same thing has been printed and read a thousand times before. As for
my division of people into ordinary and extraordinary, I acknowledge that it’s
somewhat arbitrary, but I don’t insist upon exact numbers. I only believe in my
leading idea that men are in general divided by a law of nature into two
categories, inferior (ordinary), that is, so to say, material that serves only to
reproduce its kind, and men who have the gift or the talent to utter a new word.
There are, of course, innumerable sub-divisions, but the distinguishing features
of both categories are fairly well marked. The first category, generally speaking,
are men conservative in temperament and law-abiding; they live under control
and love to be controlled. To my thinking it is their duty to be controlled,
because that’s their vocation, and there is nothing humiliating in it for them. The
second category all transgress the law; they are destroyers or disposed to
destruction according to their capacities. The crimes of these men are of course
relative and varied; for the most part they seek in very varied ways the
destruction of the present for the sake of the better. But if such a one is forced for
the sake of his idea to step over a corpse or wade through blood, he can, I
maintain, find within himself, in his conscience, a sanction for wading through
blood—that depends on the idea and its dimensions, note that. It’s only in that
sense I speak of their right to crime in my article (you remember it began with
the legal question). There’s no need for such anxiety, however; the masses will
scarcely ever admit this right, they punish them or hang them (more or less), and
in doing so fulfil quite justly their conservative vocation. But the same masses
set these criminals on a pedestal in the next generation and worship them (more
or less). The first category is always the man of the present, the second the man
of the future. The first preserve the world and people it, the second move the
world and lead it to its goal. Each class has an equal right to exist. In fact, all
have equal rights with me—and vive la guerre éternelle—till the New Jerusalem,
of course!”
 
