“Quite so, yes; the place of a mother,” Sonia answered, timidly and hurriedly.
“Then will you make my apologies to her? Through inevitable circumstances I
am forced to be absent and shall not be at the dinner in spite of your mamma’s
kind invitation.”
“Yes... I’ll tell her... at once.”
And Sonia hastily jumped up from her seat.
“Wait, that’s not all,” Pyotr Petrovitch detained her, smiling at her simplicity
and ignorance of good manners, “and you know me little, my dear Sofya
Semyonovna, if you suppose I would have ventured to trouble a person like you
for a matter of so little consequence affecting myself only. I have another
object.”
Sonia sat down hurriedly. Her eyes rested again for an instant on the grey-andrainbow-
coloured notes that remained on the table, but she quickly looked away
and fixed her eyes on Pyotr Petrovitch. She felt it horribly indecorous, especially
for her, to look at another person’s money. She stared at the gold eye-glass
which Pyotr Petrovitch held in his left hand and at the massive and extremely
handsome ring with a yellow stone on his middle finger. But suddenly she
looked away and, not knowing where to turn, ended by staring Pyotr Petrovitch
again straight in the face. After a pause of still greater dignity he continued.
“I chanced yesterday in passing to exchange a couple of words with Katerina
Ivanovna, poor woman. That was sufficient to enable me to ascertain that she is
in a position—preternatural, if one may so express it.”
“Yes... preternatural...” Sonia hurriedly assented.
“Or it would be simpler and more comprehensible to say, ill.”
“Yes, simpler and more comprehen... yes, ill.”
“Quite so. So then from a feeling of humanity and so to speak compassion, I
should be glad to be of service to her in any way, foreseeing her unfortunate
position. I believe the whole of this poverty-stricken family depends now
entirely on you?”
“Allow me to ask,” Sonia rose to her feet, “did you say something to her
yesterday of the possibility of a pension? Because she told me you had
undertaken to get her one. Was that true?”
“Not in the slightest, and indeed it’s an absurdity! I merely hinted at her
obtaining temporary assistance as the widow of an official who had died in the
service—if only she has patronage... but apparently your late parent had not
served his full term and had not indeed been in the service at all of late. In fact, if
there could be any hope, it would be very ephemeral, because there would be no
claim for assistance in that case, far from it.... And she is dreaming of a pension
already, he-he-he!... A go-ahead lady!”