He is a
kind-hearted man and was a friend of your father’s too. But having given him the
right to receive the pension, I had to wait till the debt was paid off and that is
only just done, so that I’ve been unable to send you anything all this time. But
now, thank God, I believe I shall be able to send you something more and in fact
we may congratulate ourselves on our good fortune now, of which I hasten to
inform you. In the first place, would you have guessed, dear Rodya, that your
sister has been living with me for the last six weeks and we shall not be
separated in the future. Thank God, her sufferings are over, but I will tell you
everything in order, so that you may know just how everything has happened
and all that we have hitherto concealed from you. When you wrote to me two
months ago that you had heard that Dounia had a great deal to put up with in the
Svidrigaïlovs’ house, when you wrote that and asked me to tell you all about it—
what could I write in answer to you? If I had written the whole truth to you, I
dare say you would have thrown up everything and have come to us, even if you
had to walk all the way, for I know your character and your feelings, and you
would not let your sister be insulted. I was in despair myself, but what could I
do? And, besides, I did not know the whole truth myself then. What made it all
so difficult was that Dounia received a hundred roubles in advance when she
took the place as governess in their family, on condition of part of her salary
being deducted every month, and so it was impossible to throw up the situation
without repaying the debt. This sum (now I can explain it all to you, my precious
Rodya) she took chiefly in order to send you sixty roubles, which you needed so
terribly then and which you received from us last year. We deceived you then,
writing that this money came from Dounia’s savings, but that was not so, and
now I tell you all about it, because, thank God, things have suddenly changed for
the better, and that you may know how Dounia loves you and what a heart she
has. At first indeed Mr. Svidrigaïlov treated her very rudely and used to make
disrespectful and jeering remarks at table.... But I don’t want to go into all those
painful details, so as not to worry you for nothing when it is now all over. In
short, in spite of the kind and generous behaviour of Marfa Petrovna, Mr.
Svidrigaïlov’s wife, and all the rest of the household, Dounia had a very hard
time, especially when Mr. Svidrigaïlov, relapsing into his old regimental habits,
was under the influence of Bacchus. And how do you think it was all explained
later on? Would you believe that the crazy fellow had conceived a passion for
Dounia from the beginning, but had concealed it under a show of rudeness and
contempt. Possibly he was ashamed and horrified himself at his own flighty
hopes, considering his years and his being the father of a family; and that made
him angry with Dounia. And possibly, too, he hoped by his rude and sneering
behaviour to hide the truth from others. 
