“I analysed, if I remember, the psychology of a criminal before and after the
crime.”
“Yes, and you maintained that the perpetration of a crime is always
accompanied by illness. Very, very original, but... it was not that part of your
article that interested me so much, but an idea at the end of the article which I
regret to say you merely suggested without working it out clearly. There is, if
you recollect, a suggestion that there are certain persons who can... that is, not
precisely are able to, but have a perfect right to commit breaches of morality and
crimes, and that the law is not for them.”
Raskolnikov smiled at the exaggerated and intentional distortion of his idea.
“What? What do you mean? A right to crime? But not because of the
influence of environment?” Razumihin inquired with some alarm even.
“No, not exactly because of it,” answered Porfiry. “In his article all men are
divided into ‘ordinary’ and ‘extraordinary.’ Ordinary men have to live in
submission, have no right to transgress the law, because, don’t you see, they are
ordinary. But extraordinary men have a right to commit any crime and to
transgress the law in any way, just because they are extraordinary. That was your
idea, if I am not mistaken?”
“What do you mean? That can’t be right?” Razumihin muttered in
bewilderment.
Raskolnikov smiled again. He saw the point at once, and knew where they
wanted to drive him. He decided to take up the challenge.
“That wasn’t quite my contention,” he began simply and modestly. “Yet I
admit that you have stated it almost correctly; perhaps, if you like, perfectly so.”
(It almost gave him pleasure to admit this.) “The only difference is that I don’t
contend that extraordinary people are always bound to commit breaches of
morals, as you call it. In fact, I doubt whether such an argument could be
published. I simply hinted that an ‘extraordinary’ man has the right... that is not
an official right, but an inner right to decide in his own conscience to overstep...
certain obstacles, and only in case it is essential for the practical fulfilment of his
idea (sometimes, perhaps, of benefit to the whole of humanity). You say that my
article isn’t definite; I am ready to make it as clear as I can. Perhaps I am right in
thinking you want me to; very well. I maintain that if the discoveries of Kepler
and Newton could not have been made known except by sacrificing the lives of
one, a dozen, a hundred, or more men, Newton would have had the right, would
indeed have been in duty-bound... to eliminate the dozen or the hundred men for
the sake of making his discoveries known to the whole of humanity. 
