But as soon as she went out, he got up, latched the door, undid the parcel
which Razumihin had brought in that evening and had tied up again and began
dressing. Strange to say, he seemed immediately to have become perfectly calm;
not a trace of his recent delirium nor of the panic fear that had haunted him of
late. It was the first moment of a strange sudden calm. His movements were
precise and definite; a firm purpose was evident in them. “To-day, to-day,” he
muttered to himself. He understood that he was still weak, but his intense
spiritual concentration gave him strength and self-confidence. He hoped,
moreover, that he would not fall down in the street. When he had dressed in
entirely new clothes, he looked at the money lying on the table, and after a
moment’s thought put it in his pocket. It was twenty-five roubles. He took also
all the copper change from the ten roubles spent by Razumihin on the clothes.
Then he softly unlatched the door, went out, slipped downstairs and glanced in at
the open kitchen door. Nastasya was standing with her back to him, blowing up
the landlady’s samovar. She heard nothing. Who would have dreamed of his
going out, indeed? A minute later he was in the street.
It was nearly eight o’clock, the sun was setting. It was as stifling as before, but
he eagerly drank in the stinking, dusty town air. His head felt rather dizzy; a sort
of savage energy gleamed suddenly in his feverish eyes and his wasted, pale and
yellow face. He did not know and did not think where he was going, he had one
thought only: “that all this must be ended to-day, once for all, immediately; that
he would not return home without it, because he would not go on living like
that.” How, with what to make an end? He had not an idea about it, he did not
even want to think of it. He drove away thought; thought tortured him. All he
knew, all he felt was that everything must be changed “one way or another,” he
repeated with desperate and immovable self-confidence and determination.
From old habit he took his usual walk in the direction of the Hay Market. A
dark-haired young man with a barrel organ was standing in the road in front of a
little general shop and was grinding out a very sentimental song. He was
accompanying a girl of fifteen, who stood on the pavement in front of him. She
was dressed up in a crinoline, a mantle and a straw hat with a flame-coloured
feather in it, all very old and shabby. In a strong and rather agreeable voice,
cracked and coarsened by street singing, she sang in hope of getting a copper
from the shop. Raskolnikov joined two or three listeners, took out a five copeck
piece and put it in the girl’s hand. She broke off abruptly on a sentimental high
note, shouted sharply to the organ grinder “Come on,” and both moved on to the
next shop 
