“I can’t offer you coffee here; but why not spend five minutes with a friend?”
Porfiry pattered on, “and you know all these official duties... please don’t mind
my running up and down, excuse it, my dear fellow, I am very much afraid of
offending you, but exercise is absolutely indispensable for me. I’m always sitting
and so glad to be moving about for five minutes... I suffer from my sedentary
life... I always intend to join a gymnasium; they say that officials of all ranks,
even Privy Councillors, may be seen skipping gaily there; there you have it,
modern science... yes, yes.... But as for my duties here, inquiries and all such
formalities... you mentioned inquiries yourself just now... I assure you these
interrogations are sometimes more embarrassing for the interrogator than for the
interrogated.... You made the observation yourself just now very aptly and
wittily.” (Raskolnikov had made no observation of the kind.) “One gets into a
muddle! A regular muddle! One keeps harping on the same note, like a drum!
There is to be a reform and we shall be called by a different name, at least, hehe-
he! And as for our legal tradition, as you so wittily called it, I thoroughly
agree with you. Every prisoner on trial, even the rudest peasant, knows that they
begin by disarming him with irrelevant questions (as you so happily put it) and
then deal him a knock-down blow, he-he-he!—your felicitous comparison, hehe!
So you really imagined that I meant by ‘government quarters’... he-he! You
are an ironical person. Come. I won’t go on! Ah, by the way, yes! One word
leads to another. You spoke of formality just now, apropos of the inquiry, you
know. But what’s the use of formality? In many cases it’s nonsense. Sometimes
one has a friendly chat and gets a good deal more out of it. One can always fall
back on formality, allow me to assure you. And after all, what does it amount to?
An examining lawyer cannot be bounded by formality at every step. The work of
investigation is, so to speak, a free art in its own way, he-he-he!”
Porfiry Petrovitch took breath a moment. He had simply babbled on uttering
empty phrases, letting slip a few enigmatic words and again reverting to
incoherence. He was almost running about the room, moving his fat little legs
quicker and quicker, looking at the ground, with his right hand behind his back,
while with his left making gesticulations that were extraordinarily incongruous
with his words. Raskolnikov suddenly noticed that as he ran about the room he
seemed twice to stop for a moment near the door, as though he were listening.