“Good heavens! What do you mean? What shall I question you about?”
cackled Porfiry Petrovitch with a change of tone, instantly leaving off laughing.
“Please don’t disturb yourself,” he began fidgeting from place to place and
fussily making Raskolnikov sit down. “There’s no hurry, there’s no hurry, it’s all
nonsense. Oh, no, I’m very glad you’ve come to see me at last... I look upon you
simply as a visitor. And as for my confounded laughter, please excuse it, Rodion
Romanovitch. Rodion Romanovitch? That is your name?... It’s my nerves, you
tickled me so with your witty observation; I assure you, sometimes I shake with
laughter like an india-rubber ball for half an hour at a time.... I’m often afraid of
an attack of paralysis. Do sit down. Please do, or I shall think you are angry...”
Raskolnikov did not speak; he listened, watching him, still frowning angrily.
He did sit down, but still held his cap.
“I must tell you one thing about myself, my dear Rodion Romanovitch,”
Porfiry Petrovitch continued, moving about the room and again avoiding his
visitor’s eyes. “You see, I’m a bachelor, a man of no consequence and not used
to society; besides, I have nothing before me, I’m set, I’m running to seed and...
and have you noticed, Rodion Romanovitch, that in our Petersburg circles, if two
clever men meet who are not intimate, but respect each other, like you and me, it
takes them half an hour before they can find a subject for conversation—they are
dumb, they sit opposite each other and feel awkward. Everyone has subjects of
conversation, ladies for instance... people in high society always have their
subjects of conversation, c’est de rigueur, but people of the middle sort like us,
thinking people that is, are always tongue-tied and awkward. What is the reason
of it? Whether it is the lack of public interest, or whether it is we are so honest
we don’t want to deceive one another, I don’t know. What do you think? Do put
down your cap, it looks as if you were just going, it makes me uncomfortable... I
am so delighted...”
Raskolnikov put down his cap and continued listening in silence with a
serious frowning face to the vague and empty chatter of Porfiry Petrovitch.
“Does he really want to distract my attention with his silly babble?”