“But how will you go on living? What will you live for?” cried Sonia, “how is
it possible now? Why, how can you talk to your mother? (Oh, what will become
of them now?) But what am I saying? You have abandoned your mother and
your sister already. He has abandoned them already! Oh, God!” she cried, “why,
he knows it all himself. How, how can he live by himself! What will become of
you now?”
“Don’t be a child, Sonia,” he said softly. “What wrong have I done them?
Why should I go to them? What should I say to them? That’s only a phantom....
They destroy men by millions themselves and look on it as a virtue. They are
knaves and scoundrels, Sonia! I am not going to them. And what should I say to
them—that I murdered her, but did not dare to take the money and hid it under a
stone?” he added with a bitter smile. “Why, they would laugh at me, and would
call me a fool for not getting it. A coward and a fool! They wouldn’t understand
and they don’t deserve to understand. Why should I go to them? I won’t. Don’t
be a child, Sonia....”
“It will be too much for you to bear, too much!” she repeated, holding out her
hands in despairing supplication.
“Perhaps I’ve been unfair to myself,” he observed gloomily, pondering,
“perhaps after all I am a man and not a louse and I’ve been in too great a hurry
to condemn myself. I’ll make another fight for it.”
A haughty smile appeared on his lips.
“What a burden to bear! And your whole life, your whole life!”
“I shall get used to it,” he said grimly and thoughtfully. “Listen,” he began a
minute later, “stop crying, it’s time to talk of the facts: I’ve come to tell you that
the police are after me, on my track....”
“Ach!” Sonia cried in terror.
“Well, why do you cry out? You want me to go to Siberia and now you are
frightened? But let me tell you: I shall not give myself up. I shall make a
struggle for it and they won’t do anything to me. They’ve no real evidence.
Yesterday I was in great danger and believed I was lost; but to-day things are
going better. All the facts they know can be explained two ways, that’s to say I
can turn their accusations to my credit, do you understand? And I shall, for I’ve
learnt my lesson. But they will certainly arrest me. If it had not been for
something that happened, they would have done so to-day for certain; perhaps
even now they will arrest me to-day.... But that’s no matter, Sonia; they’ll let me
out again... for there isn’t any real proof against me, and there won’t be, I give
you my word for it. And they can’t convict a man on what they have against me.
Enough.... I only tell you that you may know.... I will try to manage somehow to
put it to my mother and sister so that they won’t be frightened.... My sister’s
future is secure, however, now, I believe... and my mother’s must be too.... Well,
that’s all. Be careful, though. Will you come and see me in prison when I am
there?”