“You told the ladies so, too.”
“I know it was stupid! You may beat me if you like! Did you think so
seriously?”
“That’s nonsense, I tell you, how could I think it seriously? You, yourself,
described him as a monomaniac when you fetched me to him... and we added
fuel to the fire yesterday, you did, that is, with your story about the painter; it
was a nice conversation, when he was, perhaps, mad on that very point! If only
I’d known what happened then at the police station and that some wretch... had
insulted him with this suspicion! Hm... I would not have allowed that
conversation yesterday. These monomaniacs will make a mountain out of a
mole-hill... and see their fancies as solid realities.... As far as I remember, it was
Zametov’s story that cleared up half the mystery, to my mind. Why, I know one
case in which a hypochondriac, a man of forty, cut the throat of a little boy of
eight, because he couldn’t endure the jokes he made every day at table! And in
this case his rags, the insolent police officer, the fever and this suspicion! All that
working upon a man half frantic with hypochondria, and with his morbid
exceptional vanity! That may well have been the starting-point of illness. Well,
bother it all!... And, by the way, that Zametov certainly is a nice fellow, but hm...
he shouldn’t have told all that last night. He is an awful chatterbox!”
“But whom did he tell it to? You and me?”
“And Porfiry.”
“What does that matter?”
“And, by the way, have you any influence on them, his mother and sister? Tell
them to be more careful with him to-day....”
“They’ll get on all right!” Razumihin answered reluctantly.
“Why is he so set against this Luzhin? A man with money and she doesn’t
seem to dislike him... and they haven’t a farthing, I suppose? eh?”
“But what business is it of yours?” Razumihin cried with annoyance. “How
can I tell whether they’ve a farthing? Ask them yourself and perhaps you’ll find
out....”
“Foo! what an ass you are sometimes! Last night’s wine has not gone off
yet.... Good-bye; thank your Praskovya Pavlovna from me for my night’s
lodging. She locked herself in, made no reply to my bonjour through the door;
she was up at seven o’clock, the samovar was taken into her from the kitchen. I
was not vouchsafed a personal interview....” 
