“Listen, I want to ask you a serious question,” the student said hotly. “I was
joking of course, but look here; on one side we have a stupid, senseless,
worthless, spiteful, ailing, horrid old woman, not simply useless but doing actual
mischief, who has not an idea what she is living for herself, and who will die in a
day or two in any case. You understand? You understand?”
“Yes, yes, I understand,” answered the officer, watching his excited
companion attentively.
“Well, listen then. On the other side, fresh young lives thrown away for want
of help and by thousands, on every side! A hundred thousand good deeds could
be done and helped, on that old woman’s money which will be buried in a
monastery! Hundreds, thousands perhaps, might be set on the right path; dozens
of families saved from destitution, from ruin, from vice, from the Lock hospitals
—and all with her money. Kill her, take her money and with the help of it devote
oneself to the service of humanity and the good of all. What do you think, would
not one tiny crime be wiped out by thousands of good deeds? For one life
thousands would be saved from corruption and decay. One death, and a hundred
lives in exchange—it’s simple arithmetic! Besides, what value has the life of that
sickly, stupid, ill-natured old woman in the balance of existence! No more than
the life of a louse, of a black-beetle, less in fact because the old woman is doing
harm. She is wearing out the lives of others; the other day she bit Lizaveta’s
finger out of spite; it almost had to be amputated.”
“Of course she does not deserve to live,” remarked the officer, “but there it is,
it’s nature.”
“Oh, well, brother, but we have to correct and direct nature, and, but for that,
we should drown in an ocean of prejudice. But for that, there would never have
been a single great man. They talk of duty, conscience—I don’t want to say
anything against duty and conscience;—but the point is, what do we mean by
them? Stay, I have another question to ask you. Listen!”
“No, you stay, I’ll ask you a question. Listen!”
“Well?”
“You are talking and speechifying away, but tell me, would you kill the old
woman yourself?”
“Of course not! I was only arguing the justice of it.... It’s nothing to do with
me....” 
