Zossimov was a tall, fat man with a puffy, colourless, clean-shaven face and
straight flaxen hair. He wore spectacles, and a big gold ring on his fat finger. He
was twenty-seven. He had on a light grey fashionable loose coat, light summer
trousers, and everything about him loose, fashionable and spick and span; his
linen was irreproachable, his watch-chain was massive. In manner he was slow
and, as it were, nonchalant, and at the same time studiously free and easy; he
made efforts to conceal his self-importance, but it was apparent at every instant.
All his acquaintances found him tedious, but said he was clever at his work.
“I’ve been to you twice to-day, brother. You see, he’s come to himself,” cried
Razumihin.
“I see, I see; and how do we feel now, eh?” said Zossimov to Raskolnikov,
watching him carefully and, sitting down at the foot of the sofa, he settled
himself as comfortably as he could.
“He is still depressed,” Razumihin went on. “We’ve just changed his linen and
he almost cried.”
“That’s very natural; you might have put it off if he did not wish it.... His
pulse is first-rate. Is your head still aching, eh?”
“I am well, I am perfectly well!” Raskolnikov declared positively and
irritably. He raised himself on the sofa and looked at them with glittering eyes,
but sank back on to the pillow at once and turned to the wall. Zossimov watched
him intently.
“Very good.... Going on all right,” he said lazily. “Has he eaten anything?”
They told him, and asked what he might have.
“He may have anything... soup, tea... mushrooms and cucumbers, of course,
you must not give him; he’d better not have meat either, and... but no need to tell
you that!” Razumihin and he looked at each other. “No more medicine or
anything. I’ll look at him again to-morrow. Perhaps, to-day even... but never
mind...”
“To-morrow evening I shall take him for a walk,” said Razumihin. “We are
going to the Yusupov garden and then to the Palais de Cristal.”
“I would not disturb him to-morrow at all, but I don’t know... a little, maybe...
but we’ll see.” 
