“But he would have told you at once that the workmen could not have been
there two days before, and that therefore you must have been there on the day of
the murder at eight o’clock. And so he would have caught you over a detail.”
“Yes, that is what he was reckoning on, that I should not have time to reflect,
and should be in a hurry to make the most likely answer, and so would forget
that the workmen could not have been there two days before.”
“But how could you forget it?”
“Nothing easier. It is in just such stupid things clever people are most easily
caught. The more cunning a man is, the less he suspects that he will be caught in
a simple thing. The more cunning a man is, the simpler the trap he must be
caught in. Porfiry is not such a fool as you think....”
“He is a knave then, if that is so!”
Raskolnikov could not help laughing. But at the very moment, he was struck
by the strangeness of his own frankness, and the eagerness with which he had
made this explanation, though he had kept up all the preceding conversation with
gloomy repulsion, obviously with a motive, from necessity.
“I am getting a relish for certain aspects!” he thought to himself. But almost at
the same instant he became suddenly uneasy, as though an unexpected and
alarming idea had occurred to him. His uneasiness kept on increasing. They had
just reached the entrance to Bakaleyev’s.
“Go in alone!” said Raskolnikov suddenly. “I will be back directly.”
“Where are you going? Why, we are just here.”
“I can’t help it.... I will come in half an hour. Tell them.”
“Say what you like, I will come with you.”
“You, too, want to torture me!” he screamed, with such bitter irritation, such
despair in his eyes that Razumihin’s hands dropped. He stood for some time on
the steps, looking gloomily at Raskolnikov striding rapidly away in the direction
of his lodging. At last, gritting his teeth and clenching his fist, he swore he
would squeeze Porfiry like a lemon that very day, and went up the stairs to
reassure Pulcheria Alexandrovna, who was by now alarmed at their long
absence.
When Raskolnikov got home, his hair was soaked with sweat and he was
breathing heavily. He went rapidly up the stairs, walked into his unlocked room
and at once fastened the latch. Then in senseless terror he rushed to the corner, to
that hole under the paper where he had put the things; put his hand in, and for
some minutes felt carefully in the hole, in every crack and fold of the paper.
Finding nothing, he got up and drew a deep breath. As he was reaching the steps
of Bakaleyev’s, he suddenly fancied that something, a chain, a stud or even a bit
of paper in which they had been wrapped with the old woman’s handwriting on
it, might somehow have slipped out and been lost in some crack, and then might
suddenly turn up as unexpected, conclusive evidence against him. 
