“My dear Rodion Romanovitch, excuse me!” he flew up to him, “this won’t
do; I’m afraid you must go... it’s no good your staying... I will... you see, what a
surprise!... Good-bye!”
And taking him by the arm, he showed him to the door.
“I suppose you didn’t expect it?” said Raskolnikov who, though he had not yet
fully grasped the situation, had regained his courage.
“You did not expect it either, my friend. See how your hand is trembling! Hehe!”
“You’re trembling, too, Porfiry Petrovitch!”
“Yes, I am; I didn’t expect it.”
They were already at the door; Porfiry was impatient for Raskolnikov to be
gone.
“And your little surprise, aren’t you going to show it to me?” Raskolnikov
said, sarcastically.
“Why, his teeth are chattering as he asks, he-he! You are an ironical person!
Come, till we meet!”
“I believe we can say good-bye!”
“That’s in God’s hands,” muttered Porfiry, with an unnatural smile.
As he walked through the office, Raskolnikov noticed that many people were
looking at him. Among them he saw the two porters from the house, whom he
had invited that night to the police station. They stood there waiting. But he was
no sooner on the stairs than he heard the voice of Porfiry Petrovitch behind him.
Turning round, he saw the latter running after him, out of breath.
“One word, Rodion Romanovitch; as to all the rest, it’s in God’s hands, but as
a matter of form there are some questions I shall have to ask you... so we shall
meet again, shan’t we?”
And Porfiry stood still, facing him with a smile.
“Shan’t we?” he added again.
He seemed to want to say something more, but could not speak out.
“You must forgive me, Porfiry Petrovitch, for what has just passed... I lost my
temper,” began Raskolnikov, who had so far regained his courage that he felt
irresistibly inclined to display his coolness.
“Don’t mention it, don’t mention it,” Porfiry replied, almost gleefully. “I
myself, too... I have a wicked temper, I admit it! But we shall meet again. If it’s
God’s will, we may see a great deal of one another.”