“So I suspect now that Nikolay wants to take his suffering or something of the
sort. I know it for certain from facts, indeed. Only he doesn’t know that I know.
What, you don’t admit that there are such fantastic people among the peasants?
Lots of them. The elder now has begun influencing him, especially since he tried
to hang himself. But he’ll come and tell me all himself. You think he’ll hold out?
Wait a bit, he’ll take his words back. I am waiting from hour to hour for him to
come and abjure his evidence. I have come to like that Nikolay and am studying
him in detail. And what do you think? He-he! He answered me very plausibly on
some points, he obviously had collected some evidence and prepared himself
cleverly. But on other points he is simply at sea, knows nothing and doesn’t even
suspect that he doesn’t know!
“No, Rodion Romanovitch, Nikolay doesn’t come in! This is a fantastic,
gloomy business, a modern case, an incident of to-day when the heart of man is
troubled, when the phrase is quoted that blood ‘renews,’ when comfort is
preached as the aim of life. Here we have bookish dreams, a heart unhinged by
theories. Here we see resolution in the first stage, but resolution of a special
kind: he resolved to do it like jumping over a precipice or from a bell tower and
his legs shook as he went to the crime. He forgot to shut the door after him, and
murdered two people for a theory. He committed the murder and couldn’t take
the money, and what he did manage to snatch up he hid under a stone. It wasn’t
enough for him to suffer agony behind the door while they battered at the door
and rung the bell, no, he had to go to the empty lodging, half delirious, to recall
the bell-ringing, he wanted to feel the cold shiver over again.... Well, that we
grant, was through illness, but consider this: he is a murderer, but looks upon
himself as an honest man, despises others, poses as injured innocence. No, that’s
not the work of a Nikolay, my dear Rodion Romanovitch!”
All that had been said before had sounded so like a recantation that these
words were too great a shock. Raskolnikov shuddered as though he had been
stabbed.
“Then... who then... is the murderer?” he asked in a breathless voice, unable to
restrain himself.
Porfiry Petrovitch sank back in his chair, as though he were amazed at the
question.
“Who is the murderer?” he repeated, as though unable to believe his ears.
“Why, you, Rodion Romanovitch! You are the murderer,” he added, almost in a
whisper, in a voice of genuine conviction.
Raskolnikov leapt from the sofa, stood up for a few seconds and sat down
again without uttering a word. His face twitched convulsively.
“Your lip is twitching just as it did before,” Porfiry Petrovitch observed almost
sympathetically. “You’ve been misunderstanding me, I think, Rodion
Romanovitch,” he added after a brief pause, “that’s why you are so surprised. I
came on purpose to tell you everything and deal openly with you.”
“It was not I murdered her,” Raskolnikov whispered like a frightened child
caught in the act.
“No, it was you, you Rodion Romanovitch, and no one else,” Porfiry
whispered sternly, with conviction.