“But who are you? what prophet are you? From the height of what majestic
calm do you proclaim these words of wisdom?”
“Who am I? I am a man with nothing to hope for, that’s all. A man perhaps of
feeling and sympathy, maybe of some knowledge too, but my day is over. But
you are a different matter, there is life waiting for you. Though, who knows?
maybe your life, too, will pass off in smoke and come to nothing. Come, what
does it matter, that you will pass into another class of men? It’s not comfort you
regret, with your heart! What of it that perhaps no one will see you for so long?
It’s not time, but yourself that will decide that. Be the sun and all will see you.
The sun has before all to be the sun. Why are you smiling again? At my being
such a Schiller? I bet you’re imagining that I am trying to get round you by
flattery. Well, perhaps I am, he-he-he! Perhaps you’d better not believe my word,
perhaps you’d better never believe it altogether—I’m made that way, I confess it.
But let me add, you can judge for yourself, I think, how far I am a base sort of
man and how far I am honest.”
“When do you mean to arrest me?”
“Well, I can let you walk about another day or two. Think it over, my dear
fellow, and pray to God. It’s more in your interest, believe me.”
“And what if I run away?” asked Raskolnikov with a strange smile.
“No, you won’t run away. A peasant would run away, a fashionable dissenter
would run away, the flunkey of another man’s thought, for you’ve only to show
him the end of your little finger and he’ll be ready to believe in anything for the
rest of his life. But you’ve ceased to believe in your theory already, what will
you run away with? And what would you do in hiding? It would be hateful and
difficult for you, and what you need more than anything in life is a definite
position, an atmosphere to suit you. And what sort of atmosphere would you
have? If you ran away, you’d come back to yourself. You can’t get on without us.
And if I put you in prison—say you’ve been there a month, or two, or three—
remember my word, you’ll confess of yourself and perhaps to your own surprise.
You won’t know an hour beforehand that you are coming with a confession. I am
convinced that you will decide, ‘to take your suffering.’ You don’t believe my
words now, but you’ll come to it of yourself. For suffering, Rodion
Romanovitch, is a great thing. Never mind my having grown fat, I know all the
same. Don’t laugh at it, there’s an idea in suffering, Nikolay is right. No, you
won’t run away, Rodion Romanovitch.”