Svidrigaïlov’s lips were twisted in a condescending smile; but he was in no
smiling mood. His heart was throbbing and he could scarcely breathe. He spoke
rather loud to cover his growing excitement. But Dounia did not notice this
peculiar excitement, she was so irritated by his remark that she was frightened of
him like a child and that he was so terrible to her.
“Though I know that you are not a man... of honour, I am not in the least
afraid of you. Lead the way,” she said with apparent composure, but her face was
very pale.
Svidrigaïlov stopped at Sonia’s room.
“Allow me to inquire whether she is at home.... She is not. How unfortunate!
But I know she may come quite soon. If she’s gone out, it can only be to see a
lady about the orphans. Their mother is dead.... I’ve been meddling and making
arrangements for them. If Sofya Semyonovna does not come back in ten
minutes, I will send her to you, to-day if you like. This is my flat. These are my
two rooms. Madame Resslich, my landlady, has the next room. Now, look this
way. I will show you my chief piece of evidence: this door from my bedroom
leads into two perfectly empty rooms, which are to let. Here they are... You must
look into them with some attention.”
Svidrigaïlov occupied two fairly large furnished rooms. Dounia was looking
about her mistrustfully, but saw nothing special in the furniture or position of the
rooms. Yet there was something to observe, for instance, that Svidrigaïlov’s flat
was exactly between two sets of almost uninhabited apartments. His rooms were
not entered directly from the passage, but through the landlady’s two almost
empty rooms. Unlocking a door leading out of his bedroom, Svidrigaïlov
showed Dounia the two empty rooms that were to let. Dounia stopped in the
doorway, not knowing what she was called to look upon, but Svidrigaïlov
hastened to explain.
“Look here, at this second large room. Notice that door, it’s locked. By the
door stands a chair, the only one in the two rooms. I brought it from my rooms
so as to listen more conveniently. Just the other side of the door is Sofya
Semyonovna’s table; she sat there talking to Rodion Romanovitch. And I sat
here listening on two successive evenings, for two hours each time—and of
course I was able to learn something, what do you think?”
“You listened?”
“Yes, I did. Now come back to my room; we can’t sit down here.”