“You seem to think we are completely under your authority, Pyotr Petrovitch.
Dounia has told you the reason your desire was disregarded, she had the best
intentions. And indeed you write as though you were laying commands upon me.
Are we to consider every desire of yours as a command? Let me tell you on the
contrary that you ought to show particular delicacy and consideration for us now,
because we have thrown up everything, and have come here relying on you, and
so we are in any case in a sense in your hands.”
“That is not quite true, Pulcheria Alexandrovna, especially at the present
moment, when the news has come of Marfa Petrovna’s legacy, which seems
indeed very apropos, judging from the new tone you take to me,” he added
sarcastically.
“Judging from that remark, we may certainly presume that you were
reckoning on our helplessness,” Dounia observed irritably.
“But now in any case I cannot reckon on it, and I particularly desire not to
hinder your discussion of the secret proposals of Arkady Ivanovitch
Svidrigaïlov, which he has entrusted to your brother and which have, I perceive,
a great and possibly a very agreeable interest for you.”
“Good heavens!” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna.
Razumihin could not sit still on his chair.
“Aren’t you ashamed now, sister?” asked Raskolnikov.
“I am ashamed, Rodya,” said Dounia. “Pyotr Petrovitch, go away,” she turned
to him, white with anger.
Pyotr Petrovitch had apparently not at all expected such a conclusion. He had
too much confidence in himself, in his power and in the helplessness of his
victims. He could not believe it even now. He turned pale, and his lips quivered.
“Avdotya Romanovna, if I go out of this door now, after such a dismissal,
then, you may reckon on it, I will never come back. Consider what you are
doing. My word is not to be shaken.”
“What insolence!” cried Dounia, springing up from her seat. “I don’t want you
to come back again.”
“What! So that’s how it stands!” cried Luzhin, utterly unable to the last
moment to believe in the rupture and so completely thrown out of his reckoning
now. “So that’s how it stands! But do you know, Avdotya Romanovna, that I
might protest?”
“What right have you to speak to her like that?” Pulcheria Alexandrovna
intervened hotly. “And what can you protest about? What rights have you? Am I
to give my Dounia to a man like you? Go away, leave us altogether! We are to
blame for having agreed to a wrong action, and I above all....”
“But you have bound me, Pulcheria Alexandrovna,” Luzhin stormed in a
frenzy, “by your promise, and now you deny it and... besides... I have been led
on account of that into expenses....” 
