“Naturally,” answered Razumihin. “I have no mother, but my uncle comes
every year and almost every time he can scarcely recognise me, even in
appearance, though he is a clever man; and your three years’ separation means a
great deal. What am I to tell you? I have known Rodion for a year and a half; he
is morose, gloomy, proud and haughty, and of late—and perhaps for a long time
before—he has been suspicious and fanciful. He has a noble nature and a kind
heart. He does not like showing his feelings and would rather do a cruel thing
than open his heart freely. Sometimes, though, he is not at all morbid, but simply
cold and inhumanly callous; it’s as though he were alternating between two
characters. Sometimes he is fearfully reserved! He says he is so busy that
everything is a hindrance, and yet he lies in bed doing nothing. He doesn’t jeer at
things, not because he hasn’t the wit, but as though he hadn’t time to waste on
such trifles. He never listens to what is said to him. He is never interested in
what interests other people at any given moment. He thinks very highly of
himself and perhaps he is right. Well, what more? I think your arrival will have a
most beneficial influence upon him.”
“God grant it may,” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna, distressed by Razumihin’s
account of her Rodya.
And Razumihin ventured to look more boldly at Avdotya Romanovna at last.
He glanced at her often while he was talking, but only for a moment and looked
away again at once. Avdotya Romanovna sat at the table, listening attentively,
then got up again and began walking to and fro with her arms folded and her lips
compressed, occasionally putting in a question, without stopping her walk. She
had the same habit of not listening to what was said. She was wearing a dress of
thin dark stuff and she had a white transparent scarf round her neck. Razumihin
soon detected signs of extreme poverty in their belongings. Had Avdotya
Romanovna been dressed like a queen, he felt that he would not be afraid of her,
but perhaps just because she was poorly dressed and that he noticed all the
misery of her surroundings, his heart was filled with dread and he began to be
afraid of every word he uttered, every gesture he made, which was very trying
for a man who already felt diffident.
“You’ve told us a great deal that is interesting about my brother’s character...
and have told it impartially. I am glad. I thought that you were too uncritically
devoted to him,” observed Avdotya Romanovna with a smile. “I think you are
right that he needs a woman’s care,” she added thoughtfully.
“I didn’t say so; but I daresay you are right, only...”
“What?” 
