He gave a sudden start; another thought, that he had had yesterday, slipped
back into his mind. But he did not start at the thought recurring to him, for he
knew, he had felt beforehand, that it must come back, he was expecting it;
besides it was not only yesterday’s thought. The difference was that a month ago,
yesterday even, the thought was a mere dream: but now... now it appeared not a
dream at all, it had taken a new menacing and quite unfamiliar shape, and he
suddenly became aware of this himself.... He felt a hammering in his head, and
there was a darkness before his eyes.
He looked round hurriedly, he was searching for something. He wanted to sit
down and was looking for a seat; he was walking along the K—— Boulevard.
There was a seat about a hundred paces in front of him. He walked towards it as
fast he could; but on the way he met with a little adventure which absorbed all
his attention. Looking for the seat, he had noticed a woman walking some
twenty paces in front of him, but at first he took no more notice of her than of
other objects that crossed his path. It had happened to him many times going
home not to notice the road by which he was going, and he was accustomed to
walk like that. But there was at first sight something so strange about the woman
in front of him, that gradually his attention was riveted upon her, at first
reluctantly and, as it were, resentfully, and then more and more intently. He felt a
sudden desire to find out what it was that was so strange about the woman. In the
first place, she appeared to be a girl quite young, and she was walking in the
great heat bareheaded and with no parasol or gloves, waving her arms about in
an absurd way. She had on a dress of some light silky material, but put on
strangely awry, not properly hooked up, and torn open at the top of the skirt,
close to the waist: a great piece was rent and hanging loose. A little kerchief was
flung about her bare throat, but lay slanting on one side. The girl was walking
unsteadily, too, stumbling and staggering from side to side. She drew
Raskolnikov’s whole attention at last. He overtook the girl at the seat, but, on
reaching it, she dropped down on it, in the corner; she let her head sink on the
back of the seat and closed her eyes, apparently in extreme exhaustion. Looking
at her closely, he saw at once that she was completely drunk. It was a strange and
shocking sight. He could hardly believe that he was not mistaken. He saw before
him the face of a quite young, fair-haired girl—sixteen, perhaps not more than
fifteen, years old, pretty little face, but flushed and heavy looking and, as it were,
swollen. The girl seemed hardly to know what she was doing; she crossed one
leg over the other, lifting it indecorously, and showed every sign of being
unconscious that she was in the street.
 
