“What of it? I think, that is, it is my own personal conviction that this is the
normal condition of women. Why not? I mean, distinguons. In our present
society it is not altogether normal, because it is compulsory, but in the future
society it will be perfectly normal, because it will be voluntary. Even as it is, she
was quite right: she was suffering and that was her asset, so to speak, her capital
which she had a perfect right to dispose of. Of course, in the future society there
will be no need of assets, but her part will have another significance, rational and
in harmony with her environment. As to Sofya Semyonovna personally, I regard
her action as a vigorous protest against the organisation of society, and I respect
her deeply for it; I rejoice indeed when I look at her!”
“I was told that you got her turned out of these lodgings.”
Lebeziatnikov was enraged.
“That’s another slander,” he yelled. “It was not so at all! That was all Katerina
Ivanovna’s invention, for she did not understand! And I never made love to
Sofya Semyonovna! I was simply developing her, entirely disinterestedly, trying
to rouse her to protest.... All I wanted was her protest and Sofya Semyonovna
could not have remained here anyway!”
“Have you asked her to join your community?”
“You keep on laughing and very inappropriately, allow me to tell you. You
don’t understand! There is no such rôle in a community. The community is
established that there should be no such rôles. In a community, such a rôle is
essentially transformed and what is stupid here is sensible there, what, under
present conditions, is unnatural becomes perfectly natural in the community. It
all depends on the environment. It’s all the environment and man himself is
nothing. And I am on good terms with Sofya Semyonovna to this day, which is a
proof that she never regarded me as having wronged her. I am trying now to
attract her to the community, but on quite, quite a different footing. What are you
laughing at? We are trying to establish a community of our own, a special one,
on a broader basis. We have gone further in our convictions. We reject more!
And meanwhile I’m still developing Sofya Semyonovna. She has a beautiful,
beautiful character!”
“And you take advantage of her fine character, eh? He-he!”
“No, no! Oh, no! On the contrary.”
“Oh, on the contrary! He-he-he! A queer thing to say!”
“Believe me! Why should I disguise it? In fact, I feel it strange myself how