“Bring them back, bring them back, Sonia! Oh stupid, ungrateful children!...
Polenka! catch them.... It’s for your sakes I...”
She stumbled as she ran and fell down.
“She’s cut herself, she’s bleeding! Oh, dear!” cried Sonia, bending over her.
All ran up and crowded around. Raskolnikov and Lebeziatnikov were the first
at her side, the official too hastened up, and behind him the policeman who
muttered, “Bother!” with a gesture of impatience, feeling that the job was going
to be a troublesome one.
“Pass on! Pass on!” he said to the crowd that pressed forward.
“She’s dying,” someone shouted.
“She’s gone out of her mind,” said another.
“Lord have mercy upon us,” said a woman, crossing herself. “Have they
caught the little girl and the boy? They’re being brought back, the elder one’s got
them.... Ah, the naughty imps!”
When they examined Katerina Ivanovna carefully, they saw that she had not
cut herself against a stone, as Sonia thought, but that the blood that stained the
pavement red was from her chest.
“I’ve seen that before,” muttered the official to Raskolnikov and
Lebeziatnikov; “that’s consumption; the blood flows and chokes the patient. I
saw the same thing with a relative of my own not long ago... nearly a pint of
blood, all in a minute.... What’s to be done though? She is dying.”
“This way, this way, to my room!” Sonia implored. “I live here!... See, that
house, the second from here.... Come to me, make haste,” she turned from one to
the other. “Send for the doctor! Oh, dear!”
Thanks to the official’s efforts, this plan was adopted, the policeman even
helping to carry Katerina Ivanovna. She was carried to Sonia’s room, almost
unconscious, and laid on the bed. The blood was still flowing, but she seemed to
be coming to herself. Raskolnikov, Lebeziatnikov, and the official accompanied
Sonia into the room and were followed by the policeman, who first drove back
the crowd which followed to the very door. Polenka came in holding Kolya and
Lida, who were trembling and weeping. Several persons came in too from the
Kapernaumovs’ room; the landlord, a lame one-eyed man of strange appearance
with whiskers and hair that stood up like a brush, his wife, a woman with an
everlastingly scared expression, and several open-mouthed children with
wonder-struck faces. Among these, Svidrigaïlov suddenly made his appearance.
Raskolnikov looked at him with surprise, not understanding where he had come
from and not having noticed him in the crowd. A doctor and priest wore spoken
of. The official whispered to Raskolnikov that he thought it was too late now for
the doctor, but he ordered him to be sent for. Kapernaumov ran himself.