“It is because I am very ill,” he decided grimly at last, “I have been worrying
and fretting myself, and I don’t know what I am doing.... Yesterday and the day
before yesterday and all this time I have been worrying myself.... I shall get well
and I shall not worry.... But what if I don’t get well at all? Good God, how sick I
am of it all!”
He walked on without resting. He had a terrible longing for some distraction,
but he did not know what to do, what to attempt. A new overwhelming sensation
was gaining more and more mastery over him every moment; this was an
immeasurable, almost physical, repulsion for everything surrounding him, an
obstinate, malignant feeling of hatred. All who met him were loathsome to him
—he loathed their faces, their movements, their gestures. If anyone had
addressed him, he felt that he might have spat at him or bitten him....
He stopped suddenly, on coming out on the bank of the Little Neva, near the
bridge to Vassilyevsky Ostrov. “Why, he lives here, in that house,” he thought,
“why, I have not come to Razumihin of my own accord! Here it’s the same thing
over again.... Very interesting to know, though; have I come on purpose or have I
simply walked here by chance? Never mind, I said the day before yesterday that
I would go and see him the day after; well, and so I will! Besides I really cannot
go further now.”
He went up to Razumihin’s room on the fifth floor.
The latter was at home in his garret, busily writing at the moment, and he
opened the door himself. It was four months since they had seen each other.
Razumihin was sitting in a ragged dressing-gown, with slippers on his bare feet,
unkempt, unshaven and unwashed. His face showed surprise.
“Is it you?” he cried. He looked his comrade up and down; then after a brief
pause, he whistled. “As hard up as all that! Why, brother, you’ve cut me out!” he
added, looking at Raskolnikov’s rags. “Come sit down, you are tired, I’ll be
bound.”
And when he had sunk down on the American leather sofa, which was in even
worse condition than his own, Razumihin saw at once that his visitor was ill.
“Why, you are seriously ill, do you know that?” He began feeling his pulse.
Raskolnikov pulled away his hand.
“Never mind,” he said, “I have come for this: I have no lessons.... I wanted,...
but I don’t really want lessons....”
“But I say! You are delirious, you know!” Razumihin observed, watching him
carefully. 
