This was really unbearable. Raskolnikov could not help glancing at him with a
flash of vindictive anger in his black eyes, but immediately recollected himself.
“You seem to be jeering at me, brother?” he said to him, with a well-feigned
irritability. “I dare say I do seem to you absurdly anxious about such trash; but
you mustn’t think me selfish or grasping for that, and these two things may be
anything but trash in my eyes. I told you just now that the silver watch, though
it’s not worth a cent, is the only thing left us of my father’s. You may laugh at
me, but my mother is here,” he turned suddenly to Porfiry, “and if she knew,” he
turned again hurriedly to Razumihin, carefully making his voice tremble, “that
the watch was lost, she would be in despair! You know what women are!”
“Not a bit of it! I didn’t mean that at all! Quite the contrary!” shouted
Razumihin distressed.
“Was it right? Was it natural? Did I overdo it?” Raskolnikov asked himself in
a tremor. “Why did I say that about women?”
“Oh, your mother is with you?” Porfiry Petrovitch inquired.
“Yes.”
“When did she come?”
“Last night.”
Porfiry paused as though reflecting.
“Your things would not in any case be lost,” he went on calmly and coldly. “I
have been expecting you here for some time.”
And as though that was a matter of no importance, he carefully offered the
ash-tray to Razumihin, who was ruthlessly scattering cigarette ash over the
carpet. Raskolnikov shuddered, but Porfiry did not seem to be looking at him,
and was still concerned with Razumihin’s cigarette.
“What? Expecting him? Why, did you know that he had pledges there?” cried
Razumihin.
Porfiry Petrovitch addressed himself to Raskolnikov.
“Your things, the ring and the watch, were wrapped up together, and on the
paper your name was legibly written in pencil, together with the date on which
you left them with her...”
“How observant you are!” Raskolnikov smiled awkwardly, doing his very
utmost to look him straight in the face, but he failed, and suddenly added:
“I say that because I suppose there were a great many pledges... that it must be
difficult to remember them all.... But you remember them all so clearly, and...
and...” 
