If I leave one man quite alone, if I don’t
touch him and don’t worry him, but let him know or at least suspect every
moment that I know all about it and am watching him day and night, and if he is
in continual suspicion and terror, he’ll be bound to lose his head. He’ll come of
himself, or maybe do something which will make it as plain as twice two are
four—it’s delightful. It may be so with a simple peasant, but with one of our sort,
an intelligent man cultivated on a certain side, it’s a dead certainty. For, my dear
fellow, it’s a very important matter to know on what side a man is cultivated.
And then there are nerves, there are nerves, you have overlooked them! Why,
they are all sick, nervous and irritable!... And then how they all suffer from
spleen! That I assure you is a regular gold-mine for us. And it’s no anxiety to
me, his running about the town free! Let him, let him walk about for a bit! I
know well enough that I’ve caught him and that he won’t escape me. Where
could he escape to, he-he? Abroad, perhaps? A Pole will escape abroad, but not
here, especially as I am watching and have taken measures. Will he escape into
the depths of the country perhaps? But you know, peasants live there, real rude
Russian peasants. A modern cultivated man would prefer prison to living with
such strangers as our peasants. He-he! But that’s all nonsense, and on the
surface. It’s not merely that he has nowhere to run to, he is psychologically
unable to escape me, he-he! What an expression! Through a law of nature he
can’t escape me if he had anywhere to go. Have you seen a butterfly round a
candle? That’s how he will keep circling and circling round me. Freedom will
lose its attractions. He’ll begin to brood, he’ll weave a tangle round himself,
he’ll worry himself to death! What’s more he will provide me with a
mathematical proof—if I only give him long enough interval.... And he’ll keep
circling round me, getting nearer and nearer and then—flop! He’ll fly straight
into my mouth and I’ll swallow him, and that will be very amusing, he-he-he!
You don’t believe me?”