“But perhaps they won’t fit,” observed Nastasya.
“Not fit? Just look!” and he pulled out of his pocket Raskolnikov’s old, broken
boot, stiffly coated with dry mud. “I did not go empty-handed—they took the
size from this monster. We all did our best. And as to your linen, your landlady
has seen to that. Here, to begin with are three shirts, hempen but with a
fashionable front.... Well now then, eighty copecks the cap, two roubles twentyfive copecks the suit—together three roubles five copecks—a rouble and a half
for the boots—for, you see, they are very good—and that makes four roubles
fifty-five copecks; five roubles for the underclothes—they were bought in the lot
—which makes exactly nine roubles fifty-five copecks. Forty-five copecks
change in coppers. Will you take it? And so, Rodya, you are set up with a
complete new rig-out, for your overcoat will serve, and even has a style of its
own. That comes from getting one’s clothes from Sharmer’s! As for your socks
and other things, I leave them to you; we’ve twenty-five roubles left. And as for
Pashenka and paying for your lodging, don’t you worry. I tell you she’ll trust
you for anything. And now, brother, let me change your linen, for I daresay you
will throw off your illness with your shirt.”
“Let me be! I don’t want to!” Raskolnikov waved him off. He had listened
with disgust to Razumihin’s efforts to be playful about his purchases.
“Come, brother, don’t tell me I’ve been trudging around for nothing,”
Razumihin insisted. “Nastasya, don’t be bashful, but help me—that’s it,” and in
spite of Raskolnikov’s resistance he changed his linen. The latter sank back on
the pillows and for a minute or two said nothing.
“It will be long before I get rid of them,” he thought. “What money was all
that bought with?” he asked at last, gazing at the wall.
“Money? Why, your own, what the messenger brought from Vahrushin, your
mother sent it. Have you forgotten that, too?”
“I remember now,” said Raskolnikov after a long, sullen silence. Razumihin
looked at him, frowning and uneasy.
The door opened and a tall, stout man whose appearance seemed familiar to
Raskolnikov came in. 
