“What is it?”
He showed the notice he had received.
“You are a student?” the man asked, glancing at the notice.
“Yes, formerly a student.”
The clerk looked at him, but without the slightest interest. He was a
particularly unkempt person with the look of a fixed idea in his eye.
“There would be no getting anything out of him, because he has no interest in
anything,” thought Raskolnikov.
“Go in there to the head clerk,” said the clerk, pointing towards the furthest
room.
He went into that room—the fourth in order; it was a small room and packed
full of people, rather better dressed than in the outer rooms. Among them were
two ladies. One, poorly dressed in mourning, sat at the table opposite the chief
clerk, writing something at his dictation. The other, a very stout, buxom woman
with a purplish-red, blotchy face, excessively smartly dressed with a brooch on
her bosom as big as a saucer, was standing on one side, apparently waiting for
something. Raskolnikov thrust his notice upon the head clerk. The latter glanced
at it, said: “Wait a minute,” and went on attending to the lady in mourning.
He breathed more freely. “It can’t be that!”
By degrees he began to regain confidence, he kept urging himself to have
courage and be calm.
“Some foolishness, some trifling carelessness, and I may betray myself! Hm...
it’s a pity there’s no air here,” he added, “it’s stifling.... It makes one’s head
dizzier than ever... and one’s mind too...”
He was conscious of a terrible inner turmoil. He was afraid of losing his selfcontrol; he tried to catch at something and fix his mind on it, something quite
irrelevant, but he could not succeed in this at all. Yet the head clerk greatly
interested him, he kept hoping to see through him and guess something from his
face.
He was a very young man, about two and twenty, with a dark mobile face that
looked older than his years. He was fashionably dressed and foppish, with his
hair parted in the middle, well combed and pomaded, and wore a number of
rings on his well-scrubbed fingers and a gold chain on his waistcoat. He said a
couple of words in French to a foreigner who was in the room, and said them
fairly correctly.
“Luise Ivanovna, you can sit down,” he said casually to the gaily-dressed,
purple-faced lady, who was still standing as though not venturing to sit down,
though there was a chair beside her.
 
