“Oh, very well, for vice then. You insist on its being vice. But anyway I like a
direct question. In this vice at least there is something permanent, founded
indeed upon nature and not dependent on fantasy, something present in the blood
like an ever-burning ember, for ever setting one on fire and, maybe, not to be
quickly extinguished, even with years. You’ll agree it’s an occupation of a sort.”
“That’s nothing to rejoice at, it’s a disease and a dangerous one.”
“Oh, that’s what you think, is it! I agree, that it is a disease like everything that
exceeds moderation. And, of course, in this one must exceed moderation. But in
the first place, everybody does so in one way or another, and in the second place,
of course, one ought to be moderate and prudent, however mean it may be, but
what am I to do? If I hadn’t this, I might have to shoot myself. I am ready to
admit that a decent man ought to put up with being bored, but yet...”
“And could you shoot yourself?”
“Oh, come!” Svidrigaïlov parried with disgust. “Please don’t speak of it,” he
added hurriedly and with none of the bragging tone he had shown in all the
previous conversation. His face quite changed. “I admit it’s an unpardonable
weakness, but I can’t help it. I am afraid of death and I dislike its being talked of.
Do you know that I am to a certain extent a mystic?”
“Ah, the apparitions of Marfa Petrovna! Do they still go on visiting you?”
“Oh, don’t talk of them; there have been no more in Petersburg, confound
them!” he cried with an air of irritation. “Let’s rather talk of that... though...
H’m! I have not much time, and can’t stay long with you, it’s a pity! I should
have found plenty to tell you.”
“What’s your engagement, a woman?”
“Yes, a woman, a casual incident.... No, that’s not what I want to talk of.”
“And the hideousness, the filthiness of all your surroundings, doesn’t that
affect you? Have you lost the strength to stop yourself?”
“And do you pretend to strength, too? He-he-he! You surprised me just now,
Rodion Romanovitch, though I knew beforehand it would be so. You preach to
me about vice and æsthetics! You—a Schiller, you—an idealist! Of course that’s
all as it should be and it would be surprising if it were not so, yet it is strange in
reality.... Ah, what a pity I have no time, for you’re a most interesting type! And,
by-the-way, are you fond of Schiller? I am awfully fond of him.”
“But what a braggart you are,” Raskolnikov said with some disgust.