“What do you say?” cried the mother.
“Did the doctor really say that?” asked Avdotya Romanovna, alarmed.
“Yes, but it’s not so, not a bit of it. He gave him some medicine, a powder, I
saw it, and then your coming here.... Ah! It would have been better if you had
come to-morrow. It’s a good thing we went away. And in an hour Zossimov
himself will report to you about everything. He is not drunk! And I shan’t be
drunk.... And what made me get so tight? Because they got me into an argument,
damn them! I’ve sworn never to argue! They talk such trash! I almost came to
blows! I’ve left my uncle to preside. Would you believe, they insist on complete
absence of individualism and that’s just what they relish! Not to be themselves,
to be as unlike themselves as they can. That’s what they regard as the highest
point of progress. If only their nonsense were their own, but as it is...”
“Listen!” Pulcheria Alexandrovna interrupted timidly, but it only added fuel to
the flames.
“What do you think?” shouted Razumihin, louder than ever, “you think I am
attacking them for talking nonsense? Not a bit! I like them to talk nonsense.
That’s man’s one privilege over all creation. Through error you come to the
truth! I am a man because I err! You never reach any truth without making
fourteen mistakes and very likely a hundred and fourteen. And a fine thing, too,
in its way; but we can’t even make mistakes on our own account! Talk nonsense,
but talk your own nonsense, and I’ll kiss you for it. To go wrong in one’s own
way is better than to go right in someone else’s. In the first case you are a man,
in the second you’re no better than a bird. Truth won’t escape you, but life can
be cramped. There have been examples. And what are we doing now? In
science, development, thought, invention, ideals, aims, liberalism, judgment,
experience and everything, everything, everything, we are still in the preparatory
class at school. We prefer to live on other people’s ideas, it’s what we are used
to! Am I right, am I right?” cried Razumihin, pressing and shaking the two
ladies’ hands.
 
