His voice failed him, and he broke off. He had been listening in indescribable
agitation, as this man who had seen through and through him, went back upon
himself. He was afraid of believing it and did not believe it. In those still
ambiguous words he kept eagerly looking for something more definite and
conclusive.
“Mr. Razumihin!” cried Porfiry Petrovitch, seeming glad of a question from
Raskolnikov, who had till then been silent. “He-he-he! But I had to put Mr.
Razumihin off; two is company, three is none. Mr. Razumihin is not the right
man, besides he is an outsider. He came running to me with a pale face.... But
never mind him, why bring him in? To return to Nikolay, would you like to
know what sort of a type he is, how I understand him, that is? To begin with, he
is still a child and not exactly a coward, but something by way of an artist.
Really, don’t laugh at my describing him so. He is innocent and responsive to
influence. He has a heart, and is a fantastic fellow. He sings and dances, he tells
stories, they say, so that people come from other villages to hear him. He attends
school too, and laughs till he cries if you hold up a finger to him; he will drink
himself senseless—not as a regular vice, but at times, when people treat him,
like a child. And he stole, too, then, without knowing it himself, for ‘How can it
be stealing, if one picks it up?’ And do you know he is an Old Believer, or rather
a dissenter? There have been Wanderers[*] in his family, and he was for two
years in his village under the spiritual guidance of a certain elder. I learnt all this
from Nikolay and from his fellow villagers. And what’s more, he wanted to run
into the wilderness! He was full of fervour, prayed at night, read the old books,
‘the true’ ones, and read himself crazy.
[*] A religious sect.—TRANSLATOR’S NOTE.
“Petersburg had a great effect upon him, especially the women and the wine.
He responds to everything and he forgot the elder and all that. I learnt that an
artist here took a fancy to him, and used to go and see him, and now this
business came upon him.
“Well, he was frightened, he tried to hang himself! He ran away! How can one
get over the idea the people have of Russian legal proceedings? The very word
‘trial’ frightens some of them. Whose fault is it? We shall see what the new juries
will do. God grant they do good! Well, in prison, it seems, he remembered the
venerable elder; the Bible, too, made its appearance again. Do you know, Rodion
Romanovitch, the force of the word ‘suffering’ among some of these people! It’s
not a question of suffering for someone’s benefit, but simply, ‘one must suffer.’
If they suffer at the hands of the authorities, so much the better. In my time there
was a very meek and mild prisoner who spent a whole year in prison always
reading his Bible on the stove at night and he read himself crazy, and so crazy,
do you know, that one day, apropos of nothing, he seized a brick and flung it at
the governor; though he had done him no harm. And the way he threw it too:
aimed it a yard on one side on purpose, for fear of hurting him. Well, we know
what happens to a prisoner who assaults an officer with a weapon. So ‘he took
his suffering.’