“Wait! Hear the end. Of course they sought high and low for Nikolay; they
detained Dushkin and searched his house; Dmitri, too, was arrested; the
Kolomensky men also were turned inside out. And the day before yesterday they
arrested Nikolay in a tavern at the end of the town. He had gone there, taken the
silver cross off his neck and asked for a dram for it. They gave it to him. A few
minutes afterwards the woman went to the cowshed, and through a crack in the
wall she saw in the stable adjoining he had made a noose of his sash from the
beam, stood on a block of wood, and was trying to put his neck in the noose. The
woman screeched her hardest; people ran in. ‘So that’s what you are up to!’
‘Take me,’ he says, ‘to such-and-such a police officer; I’ll confess everything.’
Well, they took him to that police station—that is here—with a suitable escort.
So they asked him this and that, how old he is, ‘twenty-two,’ and so on. At the
question, ‘When you were working with Dmitri, didn’t you see anyone on the
staircase at such-and-such a time?’—answer: ‘To be sure folks may have gone
up and down, but I did not notice them.’ ‘And didn’t you hear anything, any
noise, and so on?’ ‘We heard nothing special.’ ‘And did you hear, Nikolay, that
on the same day Widow So-and-so and her sister were murdered and robbed?’ ‘I
never knew a thing about it. The first I heard of it was from Afanasy Pavlovitch
the day before yesterday.’ ‘And where did you find the ear-rings?’ ‘I found them
on the pavement.’ ‘Why didn’t you go to work with Dmitri the other day?’
‘Because I was drinking.’ ‘And where were you drinking?’ ‘Oh, in such-andsuch a place.’ ‘Why did you run away from Dushkin’s?’ ‘Because I was awfully
frightened.’ ‘What were you frightened of?’ ‘That I should be accused.’ ‘How
could you be frightened, if you felt free from guilt?’ Now, Zossimov, you may
not believe me, that question was put literally in those words. I know it for a
fact, it was repeated to me exactly! What do you say to that?”
“Well, anyway, there’s the evidence.”
“I am not talking of the evidence now, I am talking about that question, of
their own idea of themselves. Well, so they squeezed and squeezed him and he
confessed: ‘I did not find it in the street, but in the flat where I was painting with
Dmitri.’ ‘And how was that?’ ‘Why, Dmitri and I were painting there all day, and
we were just getting ready to go, and Dmitri took a brush and painted my face,
and he ran off and I after him. I ran after him, shouting my hardest, and at the
bottom of the stairs I ran right against the porter and some gentlemen—and how
many gentlemen were there I don’t remember. And the porter swore at me, and
the other porter swore, too, and the porter’s wife came out, and swore at us, too;
and a gentleman came into the entry with a lady, and he swore at us, too, for
Dmitri and I lay right across the way. I got hold of Dmitri’s hair and knocked
him down and began beating him. And Dmitri, too, caught me by the hair and
began beating me. But we did it all not for temper but in a friendly way, for
sport. And then Dmitri escaped and ran into the street, and I ran after him; but I
did not catch him, and went back to the flat alone; I had to clear up my things. I
began putting them together, expecting Dmitri to come, and there in the passage,
in the corner by the door, I stepped on the box. I saw it lying there wrapped up in
paper. I took off the paper, saw some little hooks, undid them, and in the box
were the ear-rings....’” 
