 
But at last he lost all control and had the
face to make Dounia an open and shameful proposal, promising her all sorts of
inducements and offering, besides, to throw up everything and take her to
another estate of his, or even abroad. You can imagine all she went through! To
leave her situation at once was impossible not only on account of the money
debt, but also to spare the feelings of Marfa Petrovna, whose suspicions would
have been aroused: and then Dounia would have been the cause of a rupture in
the family. And it would have meant a terrible scandal for Dounia too; that
would have been inevitable. There were various other reasons owing to which
Dounia could not hope to escape from that awful house for another six weeks.
You know Dounia, of course; you know how clever she is and what a strong will
she has. Dounia can endure a great deal and even in the most difficult cases she
has the fortitude to maintain her firmness. She did not even write to me about
everything for fear of upsetting me, although we were constantly in
communication. It all ended very unexpectedly. Marfa Petrovna accidentally
overheard her husband imploring Dounia in the garden, and, putting quite a
wrong interpretation on the position, threw the blame upon her, believing her to
be the cause of it all. An awful scene took place between them on the spot in the
garden; Marfa Petrovna went so far as to strike Dounia, refused to hear anything
and was shouting at her for a whole hour and then gave orders that Dounia
should be packed off at once to me in a plain peasant’s cart, into which they
flung all her things, her linen and her clothes, all pell-mell, without folding it up
and packing it. And a heavy shower of rain came on, too, and Dounia, insulted
and put to shame, had to drive with a peasant in an open cart all the seventeen
versts into town. Only think now what answer could I have sent to the letter I
received from you two months ago and what could I have written? I was in
despair; I dared not write to you the truth because you would have been very
unhappy, mortified and indignant, and yet what could you do? You could only
perhaps ruin yourself, and, besides, Dounia would not allow it; and fill up my
letter with trifles when my heart was so full of sorrow, I could not. For a whole
month the town was full of gossip about this scandal, and it came to such a pass
that Dounia and I dared not even go to church on account of the contemptuous
looks, whispers, and even remarks made aloud about us. All our acquaintances
avoided us, nobody even bowed to us in the street, and I learnt that some
shopmen and clerks were intending to insult us in a shameful way, smearing the
gates of our house with pitch, so that the landlord began to tell us we must leave.
All this was set going by Marfa Petrovna who managed to slander Dounia and
throw dirt at her in every family.