“Oh, mercy, I do not know,” cried poor Pulcheria Alexandrovna.
“Yes, yes... though I don’t agree with you in everything,” added Avdotya
Romanovna earnestly and at once uttered a cry, for he squeezed her hand so
painfully.
“Yes, you say yes... well after that you... you...” he cried in a transport, “you
are a fount of goodness, purity, sense... and perfection. Give me your hand... you
give me yours, too! I want to kiss your hands here at once, on my knees...” and
he fell on his knees on the pavement, fortunately at that time deserted.
“Leave off, I entreat you, what are you doing?” Pulcheria Alexandrovna cried,
greatly distressed.
“Get up, get up!” said Dounia laughing, though she, too, was upset.
“Not for anything till you let me kiss your hands! That’s it! Enough! I get up
and we’ll go on! I am a luckless fool, I am unworthy of you and drunk... and I
am ashamed.... I am not worthy to love you, but to do homage to you is the duty
of every man who is not a perfect beast! And I’ve done homage.... Here are your
lodgings, and for that alone Rodya was right in driving your Pyotr Petrovitch
away.... How dare he! how dare he put you in such lodgings! It’s a scandal! Do
you know the sort of people they take in here? And you his betrothed! You are
his betrothed? Yes? Well, then, I’ll tell you, your fiancé is a scoundrel.”
“Excuse me, Mr. Razumihin, you are forgetting...” Pulcheria Alexandrovna
was beginning.
“Yes, yes, you are right, I did forget myself, I am ashamed of it,” Razumihin
made haste to apologise. “But... but you can’t be angry with me for speaking so!
For I speak sincerely and not because... hm, hm! That would be disgraceful; in
fact not because I’m in... hm! Well, anyway, I won’t say why, I daren’t.... But we
all saw to-day when he came in that that man is not of our sort. Not because he
had his hair curled at the barber’s, not because he was in such a hurry to show
his wit, but because he is a spy, a speculator, because he is a skin-flint and a
buffoon. That’s evident. Do you think him clever? No, he is a fool, a fool. And is
he a match for you? Good heavens! Do you see, ladies?” he stopped suddenly on
the way upstairs to their rooms, “though all my friends there are drunk, yet they
are all honest, and though we do talk a lot of trash, and I do, too, yet we shall
talk our way to the truth at last, for we are on the right path, while Pyotr
Petrovitch... is not on the right path. Though I’ve been calling them all sorts of
names just now, I do respect them all... though I don’t respect Zametov, I like
him, for he is a puppy, and that bullock Zossimov, because he is an honest man
and knows his work. But enough, it’s all said and forgiven. Is it forgiven? Well,
then, let’s go on. I know this corridor, I’ve been here, there was a scandal here at
Number 3.... Where are you here? Which number? eight? Well, lock yourselves
in for the night, then. Don’t let anybody in. In a quarter of an hour I’ll come back
with news, and half an hour later I’ll bring Zossimov, you’ll see! Good-bye, I’ll
run.” 
