“But you have provided for the children of Katerina Ivanovna. Though...
though you had your own reasons.... I understand it all now.”
“I am always fond of children, very fond of them,” laughed Svidrigaïlov. “I
can tell you one curious instance of it. The first day I came here I visited various
haunts, after seven years I simply rushed at them. You probably notice that I am
not in a hurry to renew acquaintance with my old friends. I shall do without them
as long as I can. Do you know, when I was with Marfa Petrovna in the country, I
was haunted by the thought of these places where anyone who knows his way
about can find a great deal. Yes, upon my soul! The peasants have vodka, the
educated young people, shut out from activity, waste themselves in impossible
dreams and visions and are crippled by theories; Jews have sprung up and are
amassing money, and all the rest give themselves up to debauchery. From the
first hour the town reeked of its familiar odours. I chanced to be in a frightful
den—I like my dens dirty—it was a dance, so called, and there was a cancan
such as I never saw in my day. Yes, there you have progress. All of a sudden I
saw a little girl of thirteen, nicely dressed, dancing with a specialist in that line,
with another one vis-à-vis. Her mother was sitting on a chair by the wall. You
can’t fancy what a cancan that was! The girl was ashamed, blushed, at last felt
insulted, and began to cry. Her partner seized her and began whirling her round
and performing before her; everyone laughed and—I like your public, even the
cancan public—they laughed and shouted, ‘Serves her right—serves her right!
Shouldn’t bring children!’ Well, it’s not my business whether that consoling
reflection was logical or not. I at once fixed on my plan, sat down by the mother,
and began by saying that I too was a stranger and that people here were ill-bred
and that they couldn’t distinguish decent folks and treat them with respect, gave
her to understand that I had plenty of money, offered to take them home in my
carriage. I took them home and got to know them. They were lodging in a
miserable little hole and had only just arrived from the country. She told me that
she and her daughter could only regard my acquaintance as an honour. I found
out that they had nothing of their own and had come to town upon some legal
business. I proffered my services and money. I learnt that they had gone to the
dancing saloon by mistake, believing that it was a genuine dancing class. I
offered to assist in the young girl’s education in French and dancing. My offer
was accepted with enthusiasm as an honour—and we are still friendly.... If you
like, we’ll go and see them, only not just now.”