“Why, Mr. Razumihin, I do believe you’d let anybody beat you from sheer
benevolence.”
“Beat? Whom? Me? I’d twist his nose off at the mere idea! Potchinkov’s
house, 47, Babushkin’s flat....”
“I shall not come, Razumihin.” Raskolnikov turned and walked away.
“I bet you will,” Razumihin shouted after him. “I refuse to know you if you
don’t! Stay, hey, is Zametov in there?”
“Yes.”
“Did you see him?”
“Yes.”
“Talked to him?”
“Yes.”
“What about? Confound you, don’t tell me then. Potchinkov’s house, 47,
Babushkin’s flat, remember!”
Raskolnikov walked on and turned the corner into Sadovy Street. Razumihin
looked after him thoughtfully. Then with a wave of his hand he went into the
house but stopped short of the stairs.
“Confound it,” he went on almost aloud. “He talked sensibly but yet... I am a
fool! As if madmen didn’t talk sensibly! And this was just what Zossimov
seemed afraid of.” He struck his finger on his forehead. “What if... how could I
let him go off alone? He may drown himself.... Ach, what a blunder! I can’t.”
And he ran back to overtake Raskolnikov, but there was no trace of him. With a
curse he returned with rapid steps to the Palais de Cristal to question Zametov.
Raskolnikov walked straight to X—— Bridge, stood in the middle, and
leaning both elbows on the rail stared into the distance. On parting with
Razumihin, he felt so much weaker that he could scarcely reach this place. He
longed to sit or lie down somewhere in the street. Bending over the water, he
gazed mechanically at the last pink flush of the sunset, at the row of houses
growing dark in the gathering twilight, at one distant attic window on the left
bank, flashing as though on fire in the last rays of the setting sun, at the
darkening water of the canal, and the water seemed to catch his attention. At last
red circles flashed before his eyes, the houses seemed moving, the passers-by,
the canal banks, the carriages, all danced before his eyes. Suddenly he started,
saved again perhaps from swooning by an uncanny and hideous sight. He
became aware of someone standing on the right side of him; he looked and saw a
tall woman with a kerchief on her head, with a long, yellow, wasted face and red
sunken eyes. She was looking straight at him, but obviously she saw nothing and
recognised no one. Suddenly she leaned her right hand on the parapet, lifted her
right leg over the railing, then her left and threw herself into the canal. The filthy
water parted and swallowed up its victim for a moment, but an instant later the
drowning woman floated to the surface, moving slowly with the current, her
head and legs in the water, her skirt inflated like a balloon over her back.
 
