“He robbed her, that was the cause, he took money and things. It’s true that by
his own admission he made no use of the money or things, but hid them under a
stone, where they are now. But that was because he dared not make use of
them.”
“But how could he steal, rob? How could he dream of it?” cried Dounia, and
she jumped up from the chair. “Why, you know him, and you’ve seen him, can
he be a thief?”
She seemed to be imploring Svidrigaïlov; she had entirely forgotten her fear.
“There are thousands and millions of combinations and possibilities, Avdotya
Romanovna. A thief steals and knows he is a scoundrel, but I’ve heard of a
gentleman who broke open the mail. Who knows, very likely he thought he was
doing a gentlemanly thing! Of course I should not have believed it myself if I’d
been told of it as you have, but I believe my own ears. He explained all the
causes of it to Sofya Semyonovna too, but she did not believe her ears at first,
yet she believed her own eyes at last.”
“What... were the causes?”
“It’s a long story, Avdotya Romanovna. Here’s... how shall I tell you?—A
theory of a sort, the same one by which I for instance consider that a single
misdeed is permissible if the principal aim is right, a solitary wrongdoing and
hundreds of good deeds! It’s galling too, of course, for a young man of gifts and
overweening pride to know that if he had, for instance, a paltry three thousand,
his whole career, his whole future would be differently shaped and yet not to
have that three thousand. Add to that, nervous irritability from hunger, from
lodging in a hole, from rags, from a vivid sense of the charm of his social
position and his sister’s and mother’s position too. Above all, vanity, pride and
vanity, though goodness knows he may have good qualities too.... I am not
blaming him, please don’t think it; besides, it’s not my business. A special little
theory came in too—a theory of a sort—dividing mankind, you see, into material
and superior persons, that is persons to whom the law does not apply owing to
their superiority, who make laws for the rest of mankind, the material, that is. It’s
all right as a theory, une théorie comme une autre. Napoleon attracted him
tremendously, that is, what affected him was that a great many men of genius
have not hesitated at wrongdoing, but have overstepped the law without thinking
about it. He seems to have fancied that he was a genius too—that is, he was
convinced of it for a time. He has suffered a great deal and is still suffering from
the idea that he could make a theory, but was incapable of boldly overstepping
the law, and so he is not a man of genius. And that’s humiliating for a young
man of any pride, in our day especially....”