“Excuse me for possibly interrupting you, but it’s a matter of some
importance,” Pyotr Petrovitch observed, addressing the company generally. “I
am glad indeed to find other persons present. Amalia Ivanovna, I humbly beg
you as mistress of the house to pay careful attention to what I have to say to
Sofya Ivanovna. Sofya Ivanovna,” he went on, addressing Sonia, who was very
much surprised and already alarmed, “immediately after your visit I found that a
hundred-rouble note was missing from my table, in the room of my friend Mr.
Lebeziatnikov. If in any way whatever you know and will tell us where it is now,
I assure you on my word of honour and call all present to witness that the matter
shall end there. In the opposite case I shall be compelled to have recourse to very
serious measures and then... you must blame yourself.”
Complete silence reigned in the room. Even the crying children were still.
Sonia stood deadly pale, staring at Luzhin and unable to say a word. She seemed
not to understand. Some seconds passed.
“Well, how is it to be then?” asked Luzhin, looking intently at her.
“I don’t know.... I know nothing about it,” Sonia articulated faintly at last.
“No, you know nothing?” Luzhin repeated and again he paused for some
seconds. “Think a moment, mademoiselle,” he began severely, but still, as it
were, admonishing her. “Reflect, I am prepared to give you time for
consideration. Kindly observe this: if I were not so entirely convinced I should
not, you may be sure, with my experience venture to accuse you so directly.
Seeing that for such direct accusation before witnesses, if false or even mistaken,
I should myself in a certain sense be made responsible, I am aware of that. This
morning I changed for my own purposes several five-per-cent securities for the
sum of approximately three thousand roubles. The account is noted down in my
pocket-book. On my return home I proceeded to count the money—as Mr.
Lebeziatnikov will bear witness—and after counting two thousand three hundred
roubles I put the rest in my pocket-book in my coat pocket. About five hundred
roubles remained on the table and among them three notes of a hundred roubles
each. At that moment you entered (at my invitation)—and all the time you were
present you were exceedingly embarrassed; so that three times you jumped up in
the middle of the conversation and tried to make off. Mr. Lebeziatnikov can bear
witness to this. You yourself, mademoiselle, probably will not refuse to confirm
my statement that I invited you through Mr. Lebeziatnikov, solely in order to
discuss with you the hopeless and destitute position of your relative, Katerina
Ivanovna (whose dinner I was unable to attend), and the advisability of getting
up something of the nature of a subscription, lottery or the like, for her benefit.
You thanked me and even shed tears.