“One minute, Sofya Semyonovna. We have no secrets. You are not in our way.
I want to have another word or two with you. Listen!” he turned suddenly to
Razumihin again. “You know that... what’s his name... Porfiry Petrovitch?”
“I should think so! He is a relation. Why?” added the latter, with interest.
“Is not he managing that case... you know, about that murder?... You were
speaking about it yesterday.”
“Yes... well?” Razumihin’s eyes opened wide.
“He was inquiring for people who had pawned things, and I have some
pledges there, too—trifles—a ring my sister gave me as a keepsake when I left
home, and my father’s silver watch—they are only worth five or six roubles
altogether... but I value them. So what am I to do now? I do not want to lose the
things, especially the watch. I was quaking just now, for fear mother would ask
to look at it, when we spoke of Dounia’s watch. It is the only thing of father’s
left us. She would be ill if it were lost. You know what women are. So tell me
what to do. I know I ought to have given notice at the police station, but would it
not be better to go straight to Porfiry? Eh? What do you think? The matter might
be settled more quickly. You see, mother may ask for it before dinner.”
“Certainly not to the police station. Certainly to Porfiry,” Razumihin shouted
in extraordinary excitement. “Well, how glad I am. Let us go at once. It is a
couple of steps. We shall be sure to find him.”
“Very well, let us go.”
“And he will be very, very glad to make your acquaintance. I have often
talked to him of you at different times. I was speaking of you yesterday. Let us
go. So you knew the old woman? So that’s it! It is all turning out splendidly....
Oh, yes, Sofya Ivanovna...”
“Sofya Semyonovna,” corrected Raskolnikov. “Sofya Semyonovna, this is my
friend Razumihin, and he is a good man.”
“If you have to go now,” Sonia was beginning, not looking at Razumihin at
all, and still more embarrassed.
“Let us go,” decided Raskolnikov. “I will come to you to-day, Sofya
Semyonovna. Only tell me where you live.”
He was not exactly ill at ease, but seemed hurried, and avoided her eyes.
Sonia gave her address, and flushed as she did so. They all went out together.
“Don’t you lock up?” asked Razumihin, following him on to the stairs.
“Never,” answered Raskolnikov. “I have been meaning to buy a lock for these
two years. People are happy who have no need of locks,” he said, laughing, to
Sonia. They stood still in the gateway.
“Do you go to the right, Sofya Semyonovna? How did you find me, by the
way?” he added, as though he wanted to say something quite different. He
wanted to look at her soft clear eyes, but this was not easy.
 
