The man raised his eyes this time and turned a gloomy sinister look at
Raskolnikov.
“Murderer!” he said suddenly in a quiet but clear and distinct voice.
Raskolnikov went on walking beside him. His legs felt suddenly weak, a cold
shiver ran down his spine, and his heart seemed to stand still for a moment, then
suddenly began throbbing as though it were set free. So they walked for about a
hundred paces, side by side in silence.
The man did not look at him.
“What do you mean... what is.... Who is a murderer?” muttered Raskolnikov
hardly audibly.
“You are a murderer,” the man answered still more articulately and
emphatically, with a smile of triumphant hatred, and again he looked straight
into Raskolnikov’s pale face and stricken eyes.
They had just reached the cross-roads. The man turned to the left without
looking behind him. Raskolnikov remained standing, gazing after him. He saw
him turn round fifty paces away and look back at him still standing there.
Raskolnikov could not see clearly, but he fancied that he was again smiling the
same smile of cold hatred and triumph.
With slow faltering steps, with shaking knees, Raskolnikov made his way
back to his little garret, feeling chilled all over. He took off his cap and put it on
the table, and for ten minutes he stood without moving. Then he sank exhausted
on the sofa and with a weak moan of pain he stretched himself on it. So he lay
for half an hour.
He thought of nothing. Some thoughts or fragments of thoughts, some images
without order or coherence floated before his mind—faces of people he had seen
in his childhood or met somewhere once, whom he would never have recalled,
the belfry of the church at V., the billiard table in a restaurant and some officers
playing billiards, the smell of cigars in some underground tobacco shop, a tavern
room, a back staircase quite dark, all sloppy with dirty water and strewn with
egg-shells, and the Sunday bells floating in from somewhere.... The images
followed one another, whirling like a hurricane. Some of them he liked and tried
to clutch at, but they faded and all the while there was an oppression within him,
but it was not overwhelming, sometimes it was even pleasant.... The slight
shivering still persisted, but that too was an almost pleasant sensation.
 
