“You can’t go to the landlady, that’s perfect nonsense!” he cried. “If you stay,
though you are his mother, you’ll drive him to a frenzy, and then goodness
knows what will happen! Listen, I’ll tell you what I’ll do: Nastasya will stay
with him now, and I’ll conduct you both home, you can’t be in the streets alone;
Petersburg is an awful place in that way.... But no matter! Then I’ll run straight
back here and a quarter of an hour later, on my word of honour, I’ll bring you
news how he is, whether he is asleep, and all that. Then, listen! Then I’ll run
home in a twinkling—I’ve a lot of friends there, all drunk—I’ll fetch Zossimov
—that’s the doctor who is looking after him, he is there, too, but he is not drunk;
he is not drunk, he is never drunk! I’ll drag him to Rodya, and then to you, so
that you’ll get two reports in the hour—from the doctor, you understand, from
the doctor himself, that’s a very different thing from my account of him! If
there’s anything wrong, I swear I’ll bring you here myself, but, if it’s all right,
you go to bed. And I’ll spend the night here, in the passage, he won’t hear me,
and I’ll tell Zossimov to sleep at the landlady’s, to be at hand. Which is better for
him: you or the doctor? So come home then! But the landlady is out of the
question; it’s all right for me, but it’s out of the question for you: she wouldn’t
take you, for she’s... for she’s a fool... She’d be jealous on my account of
Avdotya Romanovna and of you, too, if you want to know... of Avdotya
Romanovna certainly. She is an absolutely, absolutely unaccountable character!
But I am a fool, too!... No matter! Come along! Do you trust me? Come, do you
trust me or not?”
“Let us go, mother,” said Avdotya Romanovna, “he will certainly do what he
has promised. He has saved Rodya already, and if the doctor really will consent
to spend the night here, what could be better?”
“You see, you... you... understand me, because you are an angel!” Razumihin
cried in ecstasy, “let us go! Nastasya! Fly upstairs and sit with him with a light;
I’ll come in a quarter of an hour.”
Though Pulcheria Alexandrovna was not perfectly convinced, she made no
further resistance. Razumihin gave an arm to each and drew them down the
stairs. He still made her uneasy, as though he was competent and good-natured,
was he capable of carrying out his promise? He seemed in such a condition....
“Ah, I see you think I am in such a condition!” Razumihin broke in upon her
thoughts, guessing them, as he strolled along the pavement with huge steps, so
that the two ladies could hardly keep up with him, a fact he did not observe,
however. “Nonsense! That is... I am drunk like a fool, but that’s not it; I am not
drunk from wine. It’s seeing you has turned my head... But don’t mind me!
Don’t take any notice: I am talking nonsense, I am not worthy of you.... I am
utterly unworthy of you! The minute I’ve taken you home, I’ll pour a couple of
pailfuls of water over my head in the gutter here, and then I shall be all right.... If
only you knew how I love you both! Don’t laugh, and don’t be angry! You may
be angry with anyone, but not with me! I am his friend, and therefore I am your
friend, too, I want to be... I had a presentiment... Last year there was a moment...
though it wasn’t a presentiment really, for you seem to have fallen from heaven.
And I expect I shan’t sleep all night... Zossimov was afraid a little time ago that
he would go mad... that’s why he mustn’t be irritated.”
 
