“I should do it quite differently,” Raskolnikov began. “This is how I would
change the notes: I’d count the first thousand three or four times backwards and
forwards, looking at every note and then I’d set to the second thousand; I’d
count that half-way through and then hold some fifty-rouble note to the light,
then turn it, then hold it to the light again—to see whether it was a good one. ‘I
am afraid,’ I would say, ‘a relation of mine lost twenty-five roubles the other day
through a false note,’ and then I’d tell them the whole story. And after I began
counting the third, ‘No, excuse me,’ I would say, ‘I fancy I made a mistake in the
seventh hundred in that second thousand, I am not sure.’ And so I would give up
the third thousand and go back to the second and so on to the end. And when I
had finished, I’d pick out one from the fifth and one from the second thousand
and take them again to the light and ask again, ‘Change them, please,’ and put
the clerk into such a stew that he would not know how to get rid of me. When
I’d finished and had gone out, I’d come back, ‘No, excuse me,’ and ask for some
explanation. That’s how I’d do it.”
“Foo! what terrible things you say!” said Zametov, laughing. “But all that is
only talk. I dare say when it came to deeds you’d make a slip. I believe that even
a practised, desperate man cannot always reckon on himself, much less you and
I. To take an example near home—that old woman murdered in our district. The
murderer seems to have been a desperate fellow, he risked everything in open
daylight, was saved by a miracle—but his hands shook, too. He did not succeed
in robbing the place, he couldn’t stand it. That was clear from the...”
Raskolnikov seemed offended.
“Clear? Why don’t you catch him then?” he cried, maliciously gibing at
Zametov.
“Well, they will catch him.”
“Who? You? Do you suppose you could catch him? You’ve a tough job! A
great point for you is whether a man is spending money or not. If he had no
money and suddenly begins spending, he must be the man. So that any child can
mislead you.”
“The fact is they always do that, though,” answered Zametov. “A man will
commit a clever murder at the risk of his life and then at once he goes drinking
in a tavern. They are caught spending money, they are not all as cunning as you
are. You wouldn’t go to a tavern, of course?”
Raskolnikov frowned and looked steadily at Zametov.
“You seem to enjoy the subject and would like to know how I should behave
in that case, too?” he asked with displeasure.
“I should like to,” Zametov answered firmly and seriously. Somewhat too
much earnestness began to appear in his words and looks. 
