But Mr. Luzhin hardened his heart and seemed to determine to take no notice
of their oddities.
“I feel the greatest regret at finding you in this situation,” he began, again
breaking the silence with an effort. “If I had been aware of your illness I should
have come earlier. But you know what business is. I have, too, a very important
legal affair in the Senate, not to mention other preoccupations which you may
well conjecture. I am expecting your mamma and sister any minute.”
Raskolnikov made a movement and seemed about to speak; his face showed
some excitement. Pyotr Petrovitch paused, waited, but as nothing followed, he
went on:
“... Any minute. I have found a lodging for them on their arrival.”
“Where?” asked Raskolnikov weakly.
“Very near here, in Bakaleyev’s house.”
“That’s in Voskresensky,” put in Razumihin. “There are two storeys of rooms,
let by a merchant called Yushin; I’ve been there.”
“Yes, rooms...”
“A disgusting place—filthy, stinking and, what’s more, of doubtful character.
Things have happened there, and there are all sorts of queer people living there.
And I went there about a scandalous business. It’s cheap, though...”
“I could not, of course, find out so much about it, for I am a stranger in
Petersburg myself,” Pyotr Petrovitch replied huffily. “However, the two rooms
are exceedingly clean, and as it is for so short a time... I have already taken a
permanent, that is, our future flat,” he said, addressing Raskolnikov, “and I am
having it done up. And meanwhile I am myself cramped for room in a lodging
with my friend Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov, in the flat of Madame
Lippevechsel; it was he who told me of Bakaleyev’s house, too...”
“Lebeziatnikov?” said Raskolnikov slowly, as if recalling something.
“Yes, Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov, a clerk in the Ministry. Do you
know him?”
“Yes... no,” Raskolnikov answered.
“Excuse me, I fancied so from your inquiry. I was once his guardian.... A very
nice young man and advanced. I like to meet young people: one learns new
things from them.” Luzhin looked round hopefully at them all.
“How do you mean?” asked Razumihin.
“In the most serious and essential matters,” Pyotr Petrovitch replied, as though
delighted at the question. “You see, it’s ten years since I visited Petersburg. All
the novelties, reforms, ideas have reached us in the provinces, but to see it all
more clearly one must be in Petersburg. And it’s my notion that you observe and
learn most by watching the younger generation. And I confess I am delighted...”
“At what?”
 
