He hurried to Svidrigaïlov’s. What he had to hope from that man he did not
know. But that man had some hidden power over him. Having once recognised
this, he could not rest, and now the time had come.
On the way, one question particularly worried him: had Svidrigaïlov been to
Porfiry’s?
As far as he could judge, he would swear to it, that he had not. He pondered
again and again, went over Porfiry’s visit; no, he hadn’t been, of course he
hadn’t.
But if he had not been yet, would he go? Meanwhile, for the present he
fancied he couldn’t. Why? He could not have explained, but if he could, he
would not have wasted much thought over it at the moment. It all worried him
and at the same time he could not attend to it. Strange to say, none would have
believed it perhaps, but he only felt a faint vague anxiety about his immediate
future. Another, much more important anxiety tormented him—it concerned
himself, but in a different, more vital way. Moreover, he was conscious of
immense moral fatigue, though his mind was working better that morning than it
had done of late.
And was it worth while, after all that had happened, to contend with these new
trivial difficulties? Was it worth while, for instance, to manoeuvre that
Svidrigaïlov should not go to Porfiry’s? Was it worth while to investigate, to
ascertain the facts, to waste time over anyone like Svidrigaïlov?
Oh, how sick he was of it all!
And yet he was hastening to Svidrigaïlov; could he be expecting something
new from him, information, or means of escape? Men will catch at straws! Was
it destiny or some instinct bringing them together? Perhaps it was only fatigue,
despair; perhaps it was not Svidrigaïlov but some other whom he needed, and
Svidrigaïlov had simply presented himself by chance. Sonia? But what should he
go to Sonia for now? To beg her tears again? He was afraid of Sonia, too. Sonia
stood before him as an irrevocable sentence. He must go his own way or hers. At
that moment especially he did not feel equal to seeing her. No, would it not be
better to try Svidrigaïlov? And he could not help inwardly owning that he had
long felt that he must see him for some reason.