Svidrigaïlov broke into a sudden laugh.
“But you’re... but there’s no getting round you,” he said, laughing in the
frankest way. “I hoped to get round you, but you took up the right line at once!”
“But you are trying to get round me still!”
“What of it? What of it?” cried Svidrigaïlov, laughing openly. “But this is
what the French call bonne guerre, and the most innocent form of deception!...
But still you have interrupted me; one way or another, I repeat again: there
would never have been any unpleasantness except for what happened in the
garden. Marfa Petrovna...”
“You have got rid of Marfa Petrovna, too, so they say?” Raskolnikov
interrupted rudely.
“Oh, you’ve heard that, too, then? You’d be sure to, though.... But as for your
question, I really don’t know what to say, though my own conscience is quite at
rest on that score. Don’t suppose that I am in any apprehension about it. All was
regular and in order; the medical inquiry diagnosed apoplexy due to bathing
immediately after a heavy dinner and a bottle of wine, and indeed it could have
proved nothing else. But I’ll tell you what I have been thinking to myself of late,
on my way here in the train, especially: didn’t I contribute to all that... calamity,
morally, in a way, by irritation or something of the sort. But I came to the
conclusion that that, too, was quite out of the question.”
Raskolnikov laughed.
“I wonder you trouble yourself about it!”
“But what are you laughing at? Only consider, I struck her just twice with a
switch—there were no marks even... don’t regard me as a cynic, please; I am
perfectly aware how atrocious it was of me and all that; but I know for certain,
too, that Marfa Petrovna was very likely pleased at my, so to say, warmth. The
story of your sister had been wrung out to the last drop; for the last three days
Marfa Petrovna had been forced to sit at home; she had nothing to show herself
with in the town. Besides, she had bored them so with that letter (you heard
about her reading the letter). And all of a sudden those two switches fell from
heaven! Her first act was to order the carriage to be got out.... Not to speak of the
fact that there are cases when women are very, very glad to be insulted in spite of
all their show of indignation. There are instances of it with everyone; human
beings in general, indeed, greatly love to be insulted, have you noticed that? But
it’s particularly so with women. One might even say it’s their only amusement.” 
