“Stupid! Feeble!” he thought. “Why did I add that?”
“But we know all who had pledges, and you are the only one who hasn’t come
forward,” Porfiry answered with hardly perceptible irony.
“I haven’t been quite well.”
“I heard that too. I heard, indeed, that you were in great distress about
something. You look pale still.”
“I am not pale at all.... No, I am quite well,” Raskolnikov snapped out rudely
and angrily, completely changing his tone. His anger was mounting, he could not
repress it. “And in my anger I shall betray myself,” flashed through his mind
again. “Why are they torturing me?”
“Not quite well!” Razumihin caught him up. “What next! He was unconscious
and delirious all yesterday. Would you believe, Porfiry, as soon as our backs
were turned, he dressed, though he could hardly stand, and gave us the slip and
went off on a spree somewhere till midnight, delirious all the time! Would you
believe it! Extraordinary!”
“Really delirious? You don’t say so!” Porfiry shook his head in a womanish
way.
“Nonsense! Don’t you believe it! But you don’t believe it anyway,”
Raskolnikov let slip in his anger. But Porfiry Petrovitch did not seem to catch
those strange words.
“But how could you have gone out if you hadn’t been delirious?” Razumihin
got hot suddenly. “What did you go out for? What was the object of it? And why
on the sly? Were you in your senses when you did it? Now that all danger is over
I can speak plainly.”
“I was awfully sick of them yesterday.” Raskolnikov addressed Porfiry
suddenly with a smile of insolent defiance, “I ran away from them to take
lodgings where they wouldn’t find me, and took a lot of money with me. Mr.
Zametov there saw it. I say, Mr. Zametov, was I sensible or delirious yesterday;
settle our dispute.”
He could have strangled Zametov at that moment, so hateful were his
expression and his silence to him.
“In my opinion you talked sensibly and even artfully, but you were extremely
irritable,” Zametov pronounced dryly.
“And Nikodim Fomitch was telling me to-day,” put in Porfiry Petrovitch, “that
he met you very late last night in the lodging of a man who had been run over.” 
