“You wouldn’t believe, you can’t imagine, Polenka,” she said, walking about
the room, “what a happy luxurious life we had in my papa’s house and how this
drunkard has brought me, and will bring you all, to ruin! Papa was a civil
colonel and only a step from being a governor; so that everyone who came to see
him said, ‘We look upon you, Ivan Mihailovitch, as our governor!’ When I...
when...” she coughed violently, “oh, cursed life,” she cried, clearing her throat
and pressing her hands to her breast, “when I... when at the last ball... at the
marshal’s... Princess Bezzemelny saw me—who gave me the blessing when your
father and I were married, Polenka—she asked at once ‘Isn’t that the pretty girl
who danced the shawl dance at the breaking-up?’ (You must mend that tear, you
must take your needle and darn it as I showed you, or to-morrow—cough,
cough, cough—he will make the hole bigger,” she articulated with effort.)
“Prince Schegolskoy, a kammerjunker, had just come from Petersburg then... he
danced the mazurka with me and wanted to make me an offer next day; but I
thanked him in flattering expressions and told him that my heart had long been
another’s. That other was your father, Polya; papa was fearfully angry.... Is the
water ready? Give me the shirt, and the stockings! Lida,” said she to the
youngest one, “you must manage without your chemise to-night... and lay your
stockings out with it... I’ll wash them together.... How is it that drunken
vagabond doesn’t come in? He has worn his shirt till it looks like a dish-clout, he
has torn it to rags! I’d do it all together, so as not to have to work two nights
running! Oh, dear! (Cough, cough, cough, cough!) Again! What’s this?” she
cried, noticing a crowd in the passage and the men, who were pushing into her
room, carrying a burden. “What is it? What are they bringing? Mercy on us!”
“Where are we to put him?” asked the policeman, looking round when
Marmeladov, unconscious and covered with blood, had been carried in.
“On the sofa! Put him straight on the sofa, with his head this way,”
Raskolnikov showed him.
“Run over in the road! Drunk!” someone shouted in the passage.
Katerina Ivanovna stood, turning white and gasping for breath. The children
were terrified. Little Lida screamed, rushed to Polenka and clutched at her,
trembling all over.
Having laid Marmeladov down, Raskolnikov flew to Katerina Ivanovna.
“For God’s sake be calm, don’t be frightened!” he said, speaking quickly, “he
was crossing the road and was run over by a carriage, don’t be frightened, he
will come to, I told them bring him here... I’ve been here already, you
remember? He will come to; I’ll pay!”
 
