“But remorse? You deny him any moral feeling then? Is he like that?”
“Ah, Avdotya Romanovna, everything is in a muddle now; not that it was ever
in very good order. Russians in general are broad in their ideas, Avdotya
Romanovna, broad like their land and exceedingly disposed to the fantastic, the
chaotic. But it’s a misfortune to be broad without a special genius. Do you
remember what a lot of talk we had together on this subject, sitting in the
evenings on the terrace after supper? Why, you used to reproach me with
breadth! Who knows, perhaps we were talking at the very time when he was
lying here thinking over his plan. There are no sacred traditions amongst us,
especially in the educated class, Avdotya Romanovna. At the best someone will
make them up somehow for himself out of books or from some old chronicle.
But those are for the most part the learned and all old fogeys, so that it would be
almost ill-bred in a man of society. You know my opinions in general, though. I
never blame anyone. I do nothing at all, I persevere in that. But we’ve talked of
this more than once before. I was so happy indeed as to interest you in my
opinions.... You are very pale, Avdotya Romanovna.”
“I know his theory. I read that article of his about men to whom all is
permitted. Razumihin brought it to me.”
“Mr. Razumihin? Your brother’s article? In a magazine? Is there such an
article? I didn’t know. It must be interesting. But where are you going, Avdotya
Romanovna?”
“I want to see Sofya Semyonovna,” Dounia articulated faintly. “How do I go
to her? She has come in, perhaps. I must see her at once. Perhaps she...”
Avdotya Romanovna could not finish. Her breath literally failed her.
“Sofya Semyonovna will not be back till night, at least I believe not. She was
to have been back at once, but if not, then she will not be in till quite late.”
“Ah, then you are lying! I see... you were lying... lying all the time.... I don’t
believe you! I don’t believe you!” cried Dounia, completely losing her head.
Almost fainting, she sank on to a chair which Svidrigaïlov made haste to give
her.
“Avdotya Romanovna, what is it? Control yourself! Here is some water. Drink
a little....”
He sprinkled some water over her. Dounia shuddered and came to herself.
“It has acted violently,” Svidrigaïlov muttered to himself, frowning. “Avdotya
Romanovna, calm yourself! Believe me, he has friends. We will save him.
Would you like me to take him abroad? I have money, I can get a ticket in three
days. And as for the murder, he will do all sorts of good deeds yet, to atone for it.
Calm yourself. He may become a great man yet. Well, how are you? How do
you feel?”