He stood as though lost in thought, and a strange, humiliated, half senseless
smile strayed on his lips. He took his cap at last and went quietly out of the
room. His ideas were all tangled. He went dreamily through the gateway.
“Here he is himself,” shouted a loud voice.
He raised his head.
The porter was standing at the door of his little room and was pointing him
out to a short man who looked like an artisan, wearing a long coat and a
waistcoat, and looking at a distance remarkably like a woman. He stooped, and
his head in a greasy cap hung forward. From his wrinkled flabby face he looked
over fifty; his little eyes were lost in fat and they looked out grimly, sternly and
discontentedly.
“What is it?” Raskolnikov asked, going up to the porter.
The man stole a look at him from under his brows and he looked at him
attentively, deliberately; then he turned slowly and went out of the gate into the
street without saying a word.
“What is it?” cried Raskolnikov.
“Why, he there was asking whether a student lived here, mentioned your name
and whom you lodged with. I saw you coming and pointed you out and he went
away. It’s funny.”
The porter too seemed rather puzzled, but not much so, and after wondering
for a moment he turned and went back to his room.
Raskolnikov ran after the stranger, and at once caught sight of him walking
along the other side of the street with the same even, deliberate step with his
eyes fixed on the ground, as though in meditation. He soon overtook him, but for
some time walked behind him. At last, moving on to a level with him, he looked
at his face. The man noticed him at once, looked at him quickly, but dropped his
eyes again; and so they walked for a minute side by side without uttering a word.
“You were inquiring for me... of the porter?” Raskolnikov said at last, but in a
curiously quiet voice.
The man made no answer; he didn’t even look at him. Again they were both
silent.
“Why do you... come and ask for me... and say nothing.... What’s the meaning
of it?”
Raskolnikov’s voice broke and he seemed unable to articulate the words
clearly 
