“I can’t say that; but another circumstance interests me in the case—the whole
question, so to say. Not to speak of the fact that crime has been greatly on the
increase among the lower classes during the last five years, not to speak of the
cases of robbery and arson everywhere, what strikes me as the strangest thing is
that in the higher classes, too, crime is increasing proportionately. In one place
one hears of a student’s robbing the mail on the high road; in another place
people of good social position forge false banknotes; in Moscow of late a whole
gang has been captured who used to forge lottery tickets, and one of the
ringleaders was a lecturer in universal history; then our secretary abroad was
murdered from some obscure motive of gain.... And if this old woman, the
pawnbroker, has been murdered by someone of a higher class in society—for
peasants don’t pawn gold trinkets—how are we to explain this demoralisation of
the civilised part of our society?”
“There are many economic changes,” put in Zossimov.
“How are we to explain it?” Razumihin caught him up. “It might be explained
by our inveterate impracticality.”
“How do you mean?”
“What answer had your lecturer in Moscow to make to the question why he
was forging notes? ‘Everybody is getting rich one way or another, so I want to
make haste to get rich too.’ I don’t remember the exact words, but the upshot
was that he wants money for nothing, without waiting or working! We’ve grown
used to having everything ready-made, to walking on crutches, to having our
food chewed for us. Then the great hour struck,[*] and every man showed
himself in his true colours.”
[*] The emancipation of the serfs in 1861 is meant.
—TRANSLATOR’S NOTE.
“But morality? And so to speak, principles...”
“But why do you worry about it?” Raskolnikov interposed suddenly. “It’s in
accordance with your theory!”
“In accordance with my theory?”
“Why, carry out logically the theory you were advocating just now, and it
follows that people may be killed...”
“Upon my word!” cried Luzhin.
“No, that’s not so,” put in Zossimov.
Raskolnikov lay with a white face and twitching upper lip, breathing painfully.
“There’s a measure in all things,” Luzhin went on superciliously. “Economic
ideas are not an incitement to murder, and one has but to suppose...”
“And is it true,” Raskolnikov interposed once more suddenly, again in a voice
quivering with fury and delight in insulting him, “is it true that you told your
fiancée... within an hour of her acceptance, that what pleased you most... was
that she was a beggar... because it was better to raise a wife from poverty, so that
you may have complete control over her, and reproach her with your being her
benefactor?” 
