At one time Raskolnikov thought of getting up and walking out and so
finishing the interview. But some curiosity and even a sort of prudence made
him linger for a moment.
“You are fond of fighting?” he asked carelessly.
“No, not very,” Svidrigaïlov answered, calmly. “And Marfa Petrovna and I
scarcely ever fought. We lived very harmoniously, and she was always pleased
with me. I only used the whip twice in all our seven years (not counting a third
occasion of a very ambiguous character). The first time, two months after our
marriage, immediately after we arrived in the country, and the last time was that
of which we are speaking. Did you suppose I was such a monster, such a
reactionary, such a slave driver? Ha, ha! By the way, do you remember, Rodion
Romanovitch, how a few years ago, in those days of beneficent publicity, a
nobleman, I’ve forgotten his name, was put to shame everywhere, in all the
papers, for having thrashed a German woman in the railway train. You
remember? It was in those days, that very year I believe, the ‘disgraceful action
of the Age’ took place (you know, ‘The Egyptian Nights,’ that public reading,
you remember? The dark eyes, you know! Ah, the golden days of our youth,
where are they?). Well, as for the gentleman who thrashed the German, I feel no
sympathy with him, because after all what need is there for sympathy? But I
must say that there are sometimes such provoking ‘Germans’ that I don’t believe
there is a progressive who could quite answer for himself. No one looked at the
subject from that point of view then, but that’s the truly humane point of view, I
assure you.”
After saying this, Svidrigaïlov broke into a sudden laugh again. Raskolnikov
saw clearly that this was a man with a firm purpose in his mind and able to keep
it to himself.
“I expect you’ve not talked to anyone for some days?” he asked.
“Scarcely anyone. I suppose you are wondering at my being such an adaptable
man?”
“No, I am only wondering at your being too adaptable a man.”
“Because I am not offended at the rudeness of your questions? Is that it? But
why take offence? As you asked, so I answered,” he replied, with a surprising
expression of simplicity. “You know, there’s hardly anything I take interest in,”
he went on, as it were dreamily, “especially now, I’ve nothing to do.... You are
quite at liberty to imagine though that I am making up to you with a motive,
particularly as I told you I want to see your sister about something. But I’ll
confess frankly, I am very much bored. The last three days especially, so I am
delighted to see you.... Don’t be angry, Rodion Romanovitch, but you seem to be
somehow awfully strange yourself. Say what you like, there’s something wrong
with you, and now, too... not this very minute, I mean, but now, generally....
Well, well, I won’t, I won’t, don’t scowl! I am not such a bear, you know, as you
think.”
 
