Evening was coming on when he reached home, so that he must have been
walking about six hours. How and where he came back he did not remember.
Undressing, and quivering like an overdriven horse, he lay down on the sofa,
drew his greatcoat over him, and at once sank into oblivion....
It was dusk when he was waked up by a fearful scream. Good God, what a
scream! Such unnatural sounds, such howling, wailing, grinding, tears, blows
and curses he had never heard.
He could never have imagined such brutality, such frenzy. In terror he sat up
in bed, almost swooning with agony. But the fighting, wailing and cursing grew
louder and louder. And then to his intense amazement he caught the voice of his
landlady. She was howling, shrieking and wailing, rapidly, hurriedly,
incoherently, so that he could not make out what she was talking about; she was
beseeching, no doubt, not to be beaten, for she was being mercilessly beaten on
the stairs. The voice of her assailant was so horrible from spite and rage that it
was almost a croak; but he, too, was saying something, and just as quickly and
indistinctly, hurrying and spluttering. All at once Raskolnikov trembled; he
recognised the voice—it was the voice of Ilya Petrovitch. Ilya Petrovitch here
and beating the landlady! He is kicking her, banging her head against the steps—
that’s clear, that can be told from the sounds, from the cries and the thuds. How
is it, is the world topsy-turvy? He could hear people running in crowds from all
the storeys and all the staircases; he heard voices, exclamations, knocking, doors
banging. “But why, why, and how could it be?” he repeated, thinking seriously
that he had gone mad. But no, he heard too distinctly! And they would come to
him then next, “for no doubt... it’s all about that... about yesterday.... Good
God!” He would have fastened his door with the latch, but he could not lift his
hand... besides, it would be useless. Terror gripped his heart like ice, tortured
him and numbed him.... But at last all this uproar, after continuing about ten
minutes, began gradually to subside. The landlady was moaning and groaning;
Ilya Petrovitch was still uttering threats and curses.... But at last he, too, seemed
to be silent, and now he could not be heard. “Can he have gone away? Good
Lord!” Yes, and now the landlady is going too, still weeping and moaning... and
then her door slammed.... Now the crowd was going from the stairs to their
rooms, exclaiming, disputing, calling to one another, raising their voices to a
shout, dropping them to a whisper. There must have been numbers of them—
almost all the inmates of the block. “But, good God, how could it be! And why,
why had he come here!”
 
