“Yes, in our legal practice there was a case almost exactly similar, a case of
morbid psychology,” Porfiry went on quickly. “A man confessed to murder and
how he kept it up! It was a regular hallucination; he brought forward facts, he
imposed upon everyone and why? He had been partly, but only partly,
unintentionally the cause of a murder and when he knew that he had given the
murderers the opportunity, he sank into dejection, it got on his mind and turned
his brain, he began imagining things and he persuaded himself that he was the
murderer. But at last the High Court of Appeal went into it and the poor fellow
was acquitted and put under proper care. Thanks to the Court of Appeal! Tut-tuttut!
Why, my dear fellow, you may drive yourself into delirium if you have the
impulse to work upon your nerves, to go ringing bells at night and asking about
blood! I’ve studied all this morbid psychology in my practice. A man is
sometimes tempted to jump out of a window or from a belfry. Just the same with
bell-ringing.... It’s all illness, Rodion Romanovitch! You have begun to neglect
your illness. You should consult an experienced doctor, what’s the good of that
fat fellow? You are lightheaded! You were delirious when you did all this!”
For a moment Raskolnikov felt everything going round.
“Is it possible, is it possible,” flashed through his mind, “that he is still lying?
He can’t be, he can’t be.” He rejected that idea, feeling to what a degree of fury
it might drive him, feeling that that fury might drive him mad.
“I was not delirious. I knew what I was doing,” he cried, straining every
faculty to penetrate Porfiry’s game, “I was quite myself, do you hear?”
“Yes, I hear and understand. You said yesterday you were not delirious, you
were particularly emphatic about it! I understand all you can tell me! A-ach!...
Listen, Rodion Romanovitch, my dear fellow. If you were actually a criminal, or
were somehow mixed up in this damnable business, would you insist that you
were not delirious but in full possession of your faculties? And so emphatically
and persistently? Would it be possible? Quite impossible, to my thinking. If you
had anything on your conscience, you certainly ought to insist that you were
delirious. That’s so, isn’t it?”
There was a note of slyness in this inquiry. Raskolnikov drew back on the sofa
as Porfiry bent over him and stared in silent perplexity at him.