But how imminent? His position gradually became clear to him.
Remembering, sketchily, the main outlines of his recent scene with Porfiry, he
could not help shuddering again with horror. Of course, he did not yet know all
Porfiry’s aims, he could not see into all his calculations. But he had already
partly shown his hand, and no one knew better than Raskolnikov how terrible
Porfiry’s “lead” had been for him. A little more and he might have given himself
away completely, circumstantially. Knowing his nervous temperament and from
the first glance seeing through him, Porfiry, though playing a bold game, was
bound to win. There’s no denying that Raskolnikov had compromised himself
seriously, but no facts had come to light as yet; there was nothing positive. But
was he taking a true view of the position? Wasn’t he mistaken? What had Porfiry
been trying to get at? Had he really some surprise prepared for him? And what
was it? Had he really been expecting something or not? How would they have
parted if it had not been for the unexpected appearance of Nikolay?
Porfiry had shown almost all his cards—of course, he had risked something in
showing them—and if he had really had anything up his sleeve (Raskolnikov
reflected), he would have shown that, too. What was that “surprise”? Was it a
joke? Had it meant anything? Could it have concealed anything like a fact, a
piece of positive evidence? His yesterday’s visitor? What had become of him?
Where was he to-day? If Porfiry really had any evidence, it must be connected
with him....
He sat on the sofa with his elbows on his knees and his face hidden in his
hands. He was still shivering nervously. At last he got up, took his cap, thought a
minute, and went to the door.
He had a sort of presentiment that for to-day, at least, he might consider
himself out of danger. He had a sudden sense almost of joy; he wanted to make
haste to Katerina Ivanovna’s. He would be too late for the funeral, of course, but
he would be in time for the memorial dinner, and there at once he would see
Sonia.