“What a cabin it is!” he cried. “I am always knocking my head. You call this a
lodging! So you are conscious, brother? I’ve just heard the news from
Pashenka.”
“He has just come to,” said Nastasya.
“Just come to,” echoed the man again, with a smile.
“And who are you?” Razumihin asked, suddenly addressing him. “My name
is Vrazumihin, at your service; not Razumihin, as I am always called, but
Vrazumihin, a student and gentleman; and he is my friend. And who are you?”
“I am the messenger from our office, from the merchant Shelopaev, and I’ve
come on business.”
“Please sit down.” Razumihin seated himself on the other side of the table.
“It’s a good thing you’ve come to, brother,” he went on to Raskolnikov. “For the
last four days you have scarcely eaten or drunk anything. We had to give you tea
in spoonfuls. I brought Zossimov to see you twice. You remember Zossimov? He
examined you carefully and said at once it was nothing serious—something
seemed to have gone to your head. Some nervous nonsense, the result of bad
feeding, he says you have not had enough beer and radish, but it’s nothing much,
it will pass and you will be all right. Zossimov is a first-rate fellow! He is
making quite a name. Come, I won’t keep you,” he said, addressing the man
again. “Will you explain what you want? You must know, Rodya, this is the
second time they have sent from the office; but it was another man last time, and
I talked to him. Who was it came before?”
“That was the day before yesterday, I venture to say, if you please, sir. That
was Alexey Semyonovitch; he is in our office, too.”
“He was more intelligent than you, don’t you think so?”
“Yes, indeed, sir, he is of more weight than I am.”
“Quite so; go on.”
“At your mamma’s request, through Afanasy Ivanovitch Vahrushin, of whom I
presume you have heard more than once, a remittance is sent to you from our
office,” the man began, addressing Raskolnikov. “If you are in an intelligible
condition, I’ve thirty-five roubles to remit to you, as Semyon Semyonovitch has
received from Afanasy Ivanovitch at your mamma’s request instructions to that
effect, as on previous occasions. Do you know him, sir?”
“Yes, I remember... Vahrushin,” Raskolnikov said dreamily 
