There’s no need. As you know, it all ended in smoke. (Hang it all,
what a lot I am drinking!) Do you know, I always, from the very beginning,
regretted that it wasn’t your sister’s fate to be born in the second or third century
A.D., as the daughter of a reigning prince or some governor or pro-consul in
Asia Minor. She would undoubtedly have been one of those who would endure
martyrdom and would have smiled when they branded her bosom with hot
pincers. And she would have gone to it of herself. And in the fourth or fifth
century she would have walked away into the Egyptian desert and would have
stayed there thirty years living on roots and ecstasies and visions. She is simply
thirsting to face some torture for someone, and if she can’t get her torture, she’ll
throw herself out of a window. I’ve heard something of a Mr. Razumihin—he’s
said to be a sensible fellow; his surname suggests it, indeed. He’s probably a
divinity student. Well, he’d better look after your sister! I believe I understand
her, and I am proud of it. But at the beginning of an acquaintance, as you know,
one is apt to be more heedless and stupid. One doesn’t see clearly. Hang it all,
why is she so handsome? It’s not my fault. In fact, it began on my side with a
most irresistible physical desire. Avdotya Romanovna is awfully chaste,
incredibly and phenomenally so. Take note, I tell you this about your sister as a
fact. She is almost morbidly chaste, in spite of her broad intelligence, and it will
stand in her way. There happened to be a girl in the house then, Parasha, a blackeyed
wench, whom I had never seen before—she had just come from another
village—very pretty, but incredibly stupid: she burst into tears, wailed so that she
could be heard all over the place and caused scandal. One day after dinner
Avdotya Romanovna followed me into an avenue in the garden and with flashing
eyes insisted on my leaving poor Parasha alone. It was almost our first
conversation by ourselves. I, of course, was only too pleased to obey her wishes,
tried to appear disconcerted, embarrassed, in fact played my part not badly. Then
came interviews, mysterious conversations, exhortations, entreaties,
supplications, even tears—would you believe it, even tears?