Raskolnikov’s entrance Porfiry Petrovitch had at once closed the door by which
he had come in and they remained alone. He met his visitor with an apparently
genial and good-tempered air, and it was only after a few minutes that
Raskolnikov saw signs of a certain awkwardness in him, as though he had been
thrown out of his reckoning or caught in something very secret.
“Ah, my dear fellow! Here you are... in our domain”... began Porfiry, holding
out both hands to him. “Come, sit down, old man... or perhaps you don’t like to
be called ‘my dear fellow’ and ‘old man!’—tout court? Please don’t think it too
familiar.... Here, on the sofa.”
Raskolnikov sat down, keeping his eyes fixed on him. “In our domain,” the
apologies for familiarity, the French phrase tout court, were all characteristic
signs.
“He held out both hands to me, but he did not give me one—he drew it back
in time,” struck him suspiciously. Both were watching each other, but when their
eyes met, quick as lightning they looked away.
“I brought you this paper... about the watch. Here it is. Is it all right or shall I
copy it again?”
“What? A paper? Yes, yes, don’t be uneasy, it’s all right,” Porfiry Petrovitch
said as though in haste, and after he had said it he took the paper and looked at it.
“Yes, it’s all right. Nothing more is needed,” he declared with the same rapidity
and he laid the paper on the table.
A minute later when he was talking of something else he took it from the table
and put it on his bureau.
“I believe you said yesterday you would like to question me... formally...
about my acquaintance with the murdered woman?” Raskolnikov was beginning
again. “Why did I put in ‘I believe’” passed through his mind in a flash. “Why
am I so uneasy at having put in that ‘I believe’?” came in a second flash. And he
suddenly felt that his uneasiness at the mere contact with Porfiry, at the first
words, at the first looks, had grown in an instant to monstrous proportions, and
that this was fearfully dangerous. His nerves were quivering, his emotion was
increasing. “It’s bad, it’s bad! I shall say too much again.”
“Yes, yes, yes! There’s no hurry, there’s no hurry,” muttered Porfiry
Petrovitch, moving to and fro about the table without any apparent aim, as it
were making dashes towards the window, the bureau and the table, at one
moment avoiding Raskolnikov’s suspicious glance, then again standing still and
looking him straight in the face.