This was a gentleman no longer young, of a stiff and portly appearance, and a
cautious and sour countenance. He began by stopping short in the doorway,
staring about him with offensive and undisguised astonishment, as though asking
himself what sort of place he had come to. Mistrustfully and with an affectation
of being alarmed and almost affronted, he scanned Raskolnikov’s low and
narrow “cabin.” With the same amazement he stared at Raskolnikov, who lay
undressed, dishevelled, unwashed, on his miserable dirty sofa, looking fixedly at
him. Then with the same deliberation he scrutinised the uncouth, unkempt figure
and unshaven face of Razumihin, who looked him boldly and inquiringly in the
face without rising from his seat. A constrained silence lasted for a couple of
minutes, and then, as might be expected, some scene-shifting took place.
Reflecting, probably from certain fairly unmistakable signs, that he would get
nothing in this “cabin” by attempting to overawe them, the gentleman softened
somewhat, and civilly, though with some severity, emphasising every syllable of
his question, addressed Zossimov:
“Rodion Romanovitch Raskolnikov, a student, or formerly a student?”
Zossimov made a slight movement, and would have answered, had not
Razumihin anticipated him.
“Here he is lying on the sofa! What do you want?”
This familiar “what do you want” seemed to cut the ground from the feet of
the pompous gentleman. He was turning to Razumihin, but checked himself in
time and turned to Zossimov again.
“This is Raskolnikov,” mumbled Zossimov, nodding towards him. Then he
gave a prolonged yawn, opening his mouth as wide as possible. Then he lazily
put his hand into his waistcoat-pocket, pulled out a huge gold watch in a round
hunter’s case, opened it, looked at it and as slowly and lazily proceeded to put it
back.
Raskolnikov himself lay without speaking, on his back, gazing persistently,
though without understanding, at the stranger. Now that his face was turned
away from the strange flower on the paper, it was extremely pale and wore a
look of anguish, as though he had just undergone an agonising operation or just
been taken from the rack. But the new-comer gradually began to arouse his
attention, then his wonder, then suspicion and even alarm. When Zossimov said
“This is Raskolnikov” he jumped up quickly, sat on the sofa and with an almost
defiant, but weak and breaking, voice articulated:
 
