He promptly put himself at
Katerina Ivanovna’s disposal and had been all that morning and all the day
before running about as fast as his legs could carry him, and very anxious that
everyone should be aware of it. For every trifle he ran to Katerina Ivanovna,
even hunting her out at the bazaar, at every instant called her “Pani.” She was
heartily sick of him before the end, though she had declared at first that she
could not have got on without this “serviceable and magnanimous man.” It was
one of Katerina Ivanovna’s characteristics to paint everyone she met in the most
glowing colours. Her praises were so exaggerated as sometimes to be
embarrassing; she would invent various circumstances to the credit of her new
acquaintance and quite genuinely believe in their reality. Then all of a sudden
she would be disillusioned and would rudely and contemptuously repulse the
person she had only a few hours before been literally adoring. She was naturally
of a gay, lively and peace-loving disposition, but from continual failures and
misfortunes she had come to desire so keenly that all should live in peace and joy
and should not dare to break the peace, that the slightest jar, the smallest disaster
reduced her almost to frenzy, and she would pass in an instant from the brightest
hopes and fancies to cursing her fate and raving, and knocking her head against
the wall.
Amalia Ivanovna, too, suddenly acquired extraordinary importance in
Katerina Ivanovna’s eyes and was treated by her with extraordinary respect,
probably only because Amalia Ivanovna had thrown herself heart and soul into
the preparations. She had undertaken to lay the table, to provide the linen,
crockery, etc., and to cook the dishes in her kitchen, and Katerina Ivanovna had
left it all in her hands and gone herself to the cemetery. Everything had been well
done. Even the table-cloth was nearly clean; the crockery, knives, forks and
glasses were, of course, of all shapes and patterns, lent by different lodgers, but
the table was properly laid at the time fixed, and Amalia Ivanovna, feeling she
had done her work well, had put on a black silk dress and a cap with new
mourning ribbons and met the returning party with some pride. This pride,
though justifiable, displeased Katerina Ivanovna for some reason: “as though the
table could not have been laid except by Amalia Ivanovna!” She disliked the cap
with new ribbons, too. “Could she be stuck up, the stupid German, because she
was mistress of the house, and had consented as a favour to help her poor
lodgers! As a favour! Fancy that! Katerina Ivanovna’s father who had been a
colonel and almost a governor had sometimes had the table set for forty persons,
and then anyone like Amalia Ivanovna, or rather Ludwigovna, would not have
been allowed into the kitchen.”