If they stopped him—all was lost; if they let him pass—all was lost too; they
would remember him. They were approaching; they were only a flight from him
—and suddenly deliverance! A few steps from him on the right, there was an
empty flat with the door wide open, the flat on the second floor where the
painters had been at work, and which, as though for his benefit, they had just
left. It was they, no doubt, who had just run down, shouting. The floor had only
just been painted, in the middle of the room stood a pail and a broken pot with
paint and brushes. In one instant he had whisked in at the open door and hidden
behind the wall and only in the nick of time; they had already reached the
landing. Then they turned and went on up to the fourth floor, talking loudly. He
waited, went out on tiptoe and ran down the stairs.
No one was on the stairs, nor in the gateway. He passed quickly through the
gateway and turned to the left in the street.
He knew, he knew perfectly well that at that moment they were at the flat, that
they were greatly astonished at finding it unlocked, as the door had just been
fastened, that by now they were looking at the bodies, that before another minute
had passed they would guess and completely realise that the murderer had just
been there, and had succeeded in hiding somewhere, slipping by them and
escaping. They would guess most likely that he had been in the empty flat, while
they were going upstairs. And meanwhile he dared not quicken his pace much,
though the next turning was still nearly a hundred yards away. “Should he slip
through some gateway and wait somewhere in an unknown street? No, hopeless!
Should he fling away the axe? Should he take a cab? Hopeless, hopeless!”
At last he reached the turning. He turned down it more dead than alive. Here
he was half way to safety, and he understood it; it was less risky because there
was a great crowd of people, and he was lost in it like a grain of sand. But all he
had suffered had so weakened him that he could scarcely move. Perspiration ran
down him in drops, his neck was all wet. “My word, he has been going it!”
someone shouted at him when he came out on the canal bank.
He was only dimly conscious of himself now, and the farther he went the
worse it was. He remembered however, that on coming out on to the canal bank,
he was alarmed at finding few people there and so being more conspicuous, and
he had thought of turning back. Though he was almost falling from fatigue, he
went a long way round so as to get home from quite a different direction.
He was not fully conscious when he passed through the gateway of his house!
He was already on the staircase before he recollected the axe. And yet he had a
very grave problem before him, to put it back and to escape observation as far as
possible in doing so. He was of course incapable of reflecting that it might
perhaps be far better not to restore the axe at all, but to drop it later on in
somebody’s yard. But it all happened fortunately, the door of the porter’s room
was closed but not locked, so that it seemed most likely that the porter was at
home. But he had so completely lost all power of reflection that he walked
straight to the door and opened it. If the porter had asked him, “What do you
want?” he would perhaps have simply handed him the axe. But again the porter
was not at home, and he succeeded in putting the axe back under the bench, and
even covering it with the chunk of wood as before. He met no one, not a soul,
afterwards on the way to his room; the landlady’s door was shut. When he was in
his room, he flung himself on the sofa just as he was—he did not sleep, but sank
into blank forgetfulness. If anyone had come into his room then, he would have
jumped up at once and screamed. Scraps and shreds of thoughts were simply
swarming in his brain, but he could not catch at one, he could not rest on one, in
spite of all his efforts.... 
