“He’s done it this time!” Katerina Ivanovna cried despairingly and she rushed
to her husband.
Raskolnikov noticed at once that she was not one of those women who swoon
easily. She instantly placed under the luckless man’s head a pillow, which no one
had thought of and began undressing and examining him. She kept her head,
forgetting herself, biting her trembling lips and stifling the screams which were
ready to break from her.
Raskolnikov meanwhile induced someone to run for a doctor. There was a
doctor, it appeared, next door but one.
“I’ve sent for a doctor,” he kept assuring Katerina Ivanovna, “don’t be uneasy,
I’ll pay. Haven’t you water?... and give me a napkin or a towel, anything, as
quick as you can.... He is injured, but not killed, believe me.... We shall see what
the doctor says!”
Katerina Ivanovna ran to the window; there, on a broken chair in the corner, a
large earthenware basin full of water had been stood, in readiness for washing
her children’s and husband’s linen that night. This washing was done by
Katerina Ivanovna at night at least twice a week, if not oftener. For the family
had come to such a pass that they were practically without change of linen, and
Katerina Ivanovna could not endure uncleanliness and, rather than see dirt in the
house, she preferred to wear herself out at night, working beyond her strength
when the rest were asleep, so as to get the wet linen hung on a line and dry by
the morning. She took up the basin of water at Raskolnikov’s request, but almost
fell down with her burden. But the latter had already succeeded in finding a
towel, wetted it and began washing the blood off Marmeladov’s face.
Katerina Ivanovna stood by, breathing painfully and pressing her hands to her
breast. She was in need of attention herself. Raskolnikov began to realise that he
might have made a mistake in having the injured man brought here. The
policeman, too, stood in hesitation.
“Polenka,” cried Katerina Ivanovna, “run to Sonia, make haste. If you don’t
find her at home, leave word that her father has been run over and that she is to
come here at once... when she comes in. Run, Polenka! there, put on the shawl.”
“Run your fastest!” cried the little boy on the chair suddenly, after which he
relapsed into the same dumb rigidity, with round eyes, his heels thrust forward
and his toes spread out.
 
