“And this is a consolation to me! This does not hurt me, but is a positive conso-la-tion, ho-nou-red sir,” he called out, shaken to and fro by his hair and even
once striking the ground with his forehead. The child asleep on the floor woke
up, and began to cry. The boy in the corner losing all control began trembling
and screaming and rushed to his sister in violent terror, almost in a fit. The eldest
girl was shaking like a leaf.
“He’s drunk it! he’s drunk it all,” the poor woman screamed in despair—“and
his clothes are gone! And they are hungry, hungry!”—and wringing her hands
she pointed to the children. “Oh, accursed life! And you, are you not
ashamed?”—she pounced all at once upon Raskolnikov—“from the tavern!
Have you been drinking with him? You have been drinking with him, too! Go
away!”
The young man was hastening away without uttering a word. The inner door
was thrown wide open and inquisitive faces were peering in at it. Coarse
laughing faces with pipes and cigarettes and heads wearing caps thrust
themselves in at the doorway. Further in could be seen figures in dressing gowns
flung open, in costumes of unseemly scantiness, some of them with cards in their
hands. They were particularly diverted, when Marmeladov, dragged about by his
hair, shouted that it was a consolation to him. They even began to come into the
room; at last a sinister shrill outcry was heard: this came from Amalia
Lippevechsel herself pushing her way amongst them and trying to restore order
after her own fashion and for the hundredth time to frighten the poor woman by
ordering her with coarse abuse to clear out of the room next day. As he went out,
Raskolnikov had time to put his hand into his pocket, to snatch up the coppers he
had received in exchange for his rouble in the tavern and to lay them unnoticed
on the window. Afterwards on the stairs, he changed his mind and would have
gone back.
“What a stupid thing I’ve done,” he thought to himself, “they have Sonia and I
want it myself.” But reflecting that it would be impossible to take it back now
and that in any case he would not have taken it, he dismissed it with a wave of
his hand and went back to his lodging. “Sonia wants pomatum too,” he said as
he walked along the street, and he laughed malignantly—“such smartness costs
money.... Hm! And maybe Sonia herself will be bankrupt to-day, for there is
always a risk, hunting big game... digging for gold... then they would all be
without a crust to-morrow except for my money. Hurrah for Sonia! What a mine
they’ve dug there! And they’re making the most of it! Yes, they are making the
most of it! They’ve wept over it and grown used to it. Man grows used to
everything, the scoundrel!” 
