When he had finished with this, he thrust his hand into a little opening
between his sofa and the floor, fumbled in the left corner and drew out the
pledge, which he had got ready long before and hidden there. This pledge was,
however, only a smoothly planed piece of wood the size and thickness of a silver
cigarette case. He picked up this piece of wood in one of his wanderings in a
courtyard where there was some sort of a workshop. Afterwards he had added to
the wood a thin smooth piece of iron, which he had also picked up at the same
time in the street. Putting the iron which was a little the smaller on the piece of
wood, he fastened them very firmly, crossing and re-crossing the thread round
them; then wrapped them carefully and daintily in clean white paper and tied up
the parcel so that it would be very difficult to untie it. This was in order to divert
the attention of the old woman for a time, while she was trying to undo the knot,
and so to gain a moment. The iron strip was added to give weight, so that the
woman might not guess the first minute that the “thing” was made of wood. All
this had been stored by him beforehand under the sofa. He had only just got the
pledge out when he heard someone suddenly about in the yard.
“It struck six long ago.”
“Long ago! My God!”
He rushed to the door, listened, caught up his hat and began to descend his
thirteen steps cautiously, noiselessly, like a cat. He had still the most important
thing to do—to steal the axe from the kitchen. That the deed must be done with
an axe he had decided long ago. He had also a pocket pruning-knife, but he
could not rely on the knife and still less on his own strength, and so resolved
finally on the axe. We may note in passing, one peculiarity in regard to all the
final resolutions taken by him in the matter; they had one strange characteristic:
the more final they were, the more hideous and the more absurd they at once
became in his eyes. In spite of all his agonising inward struggle, he never for a
single instant all that time could believe in the carrying out of his plans. 
