“Zametov? The head clerk? What for?” Raskolnikov turned round quickly and
fixed his eyes on Razumihin.
“What’s the matter with you?... What are you upset about? He wanted to make
your acquaintance because I talked to him a lot about you.... How could I have
found out so much except from him? He is a capital fellow, brother, first-rate...
in his own way, of course. Now we are friends—see each other almost every day.
I have moved into this part, you know. I have only just moved. I’ve been with
him to Luise Ivanovna once or twice.... Do you remember Luise, Luise
Ivanovna?
“Did I say anything in delirium?”
“I should think so! You were beside yourself.”
“What did I rave about?”
“What next? What did you rave about? What people do rave about.... Well,
brother, now I must not lose time. To work.” He got up from the table and took
up his cap.
“What did I rave about?”
“How he keeps on! Are you afraid of having let out some secret? Don’t worry
yourself; you said nothing about a countess. But you said a lot about a bulldog,
and about ear-rings and chains, and about Krestovsky Island, and some porter,
and Nikodim Fomitch and Ilya Petrovitch, the assistant superintendent. And
another thing that was of special interest to you was your own sock. You whined,
‘Give me my sock.’ Zametov hunted all about your room for your socks, and
with his own scented, ring-bedecked fingers he gave you the rag. And only then
were you comforted, and for the next twenty-four hours you held the wretched
thing in your hand; we could not get it from you. It is most likely somewhere
under your quilt at this moment. And then you asked so piteously for fringe for
your trousers. We tried to find out what sort of fringe, but we could not make it
out. Now to business! Here are thirty-five roubles; I take ten of them, and shall
give you an account of them in an hour or two. I will let Zossimov know at the
same time, though he ought to have been here long ago, for it is nearly twelve.
And you, Nastasya, look in pretty often while I am away, to see whether he
wants a drink or anything else. And I will tell Pashenka what is wanted myself.
Good-bye!”
“He calls her Pashenka! Ah, he’s a deep one!” said Nastasya as he went out;
then she opened the door and stood listening, but could not resist running
downstairs after him. She was very eager to hear what he would say to the
landlady. She was evidently quite fascinated by Razumihin. 
