“Thank God, the doctor,” exclaimed Raskolnikov, relieved.
The doctor came in, a precise little old man, a German, looking about him
mistrustfully; he went up to the sick man, took his pulse, carefully felt his head
and with the help of Katerina Ivanovna he unbuttoned the blood-stained shirt,
and bared the injured man’s chest. It was gashed, crushed and fractured, several
ribs on the right side were broken. On the left side, just over the heart, was a
large, sinister-looking yellowish-black bruise—a cruel kick from the horse’s
hoof. The doctor frowned. The policeman told him that he was caught in the
wheel and turned round with it for thirty yards on the road.
“It’s wonderful that he has recovered consciousness,” the doctor whispered
softly to Raskolnikov.
“What do you think of him?” he asked.
“He will die immediately.”
“Is there really no hope?”
“Not the faintest! He is at the last gasp.... His head is badly injured, too...
Hm... I could bleed him if you like, but... it would be useless. He is bound to die
within the next five or ten minutes.”
“Better bleed him then.”
“If you like.... But I warn you it will be perfectly useless.”
At that moment other steps were heard; the crowd in the passage parted, and
the priest, a little, grey old man, appeared in the doorway bearing the sacrament.
A policeman had gone for him at the time of the accident. The doctor changed
places with him, exchanging glances with him. Raskolnikov begged the doctor
to remain a little while. He shrugged his shoulders and remained.
All stepped back. The confession was soon over. The dying man probably
understood little; he could only utter indistinct broken sounds. Katerina
Ivanovna took little Lida, lifted the boy from the chair, knelt down in the corner
by the stove and made the children kneel in front of her. The little girl was still
trembling; but the boy, kneeling on his little bare knees, lifted his hand
rhythmically, crossing himself with precision and bowed down, touching the
floor with his forehead, which seemed to afford him especial satisfaction.
Katerina Ivanovna bit her lips and held back her tears; she prayed, too, now and
then pulling straight the boy’s shirt, and managed to cover the girl’s bare
shoulders with a kerchief, which she took from the chest without rising from her
knees or ceasing to pray. Meanwhile the door from the inner rooms was opened
inquisitively again. In the passage the crowd of spectators from all the flats on
the staircase grew denser and denser, but they did not venture beyond the
threshold. A single candle-end lighted up the scene.
 
