“But can that be true?” he cried to himself. “Can that creature who has still
preserved the purity of her spirit be consciously drawn at last into that sink of
filth and iniquity? Can the process already have begun? Can it be that she has
only been able to bear it till now, because vice has begun to be less loathsome to
her? No, no, that cannot be!” he cried, as Sonia had just before. “No, what has
kept her from the canal till now is the idea of sin and they, the children.... And if
she has not gone out of her mind... but who says she has not gone out of her
mind? Is she in her senses? Can one talk, can one reason as she does? How can
she sit on the edge of the abyss of loathsomeness into which she is slipping and
refuse to listen when she is told of danger? Does she expect a miracle? No doubt
she does. Doesn’t that all mean madness?”
He stayed obstinately at that thought. He liked that explanation indeed better
than any other. He began looking more intently at her.
“So you pray to God a great deal, Sonia?” he asked her.
Sonia did not speak; he stood beside her waiting for an answer.
“What should I be without God?” she whispered rapidly, forcibly, glancing at
him with suddenly flashing eyes, and squeezing his hand.
“Ah, so that is it!” he thought.
“And what does God do for you?” he asked, probing her further.
Sonia was silent a long while, as though she could not answer. Her weak chest
kept heaving with emotion.
“Be silent! Don’t ask! You don’t deserve!” she cried suddenly, looking sternly
and wrathfully at him.
“That’s it, that’s it,” he repeated to himself.
“He does everything,” she whispered quickly, looking down again.
“That’s the way out! That’s the explanation,” he decided, scrutinising her with
eager curiosity, with a new, strange, almost morbid feeling. He gazed at that
pale, thin, irregular, angular little face, those soft blue eyes, which could flash
with such fire, such stern energy, that little body still shaking with indignation
and anger—and it all seemed to him more and more strange, almost impossible.
“She is a religious maniac!” he repeated to himself.