“No, I know nothing about it,” said Svidrigaïlov, seeming surprised.
“Well, then, let us leave me alone,” Raskolnikov muttered, frowning.
“Very good, let us leave you alone.”
“You had better tell me, if you come here to drink, and directed me twice to
come here to you, why did you hide, and try to get away just now when I looked
at the window from the street? I saw it.”
“He-he! And why was it you lay on your sofa with closed eyes and pretended
to be asleep, though you were wide awake while I stood in your doorway? I saw
it.”
“I may have had... reasons. You know that yourself.”
“And I may have had my reasons, though you don’t know them.”
Raskolnikov dropped his right elbow on the table, leaned his chin in the
fingers of his right hand, and stared intently at Svidrigaïlov. For a full minute he
scrutinised his face, which had impressed him before. It was a strange face, like
a mask; white and red, with bright red lips, with a flaxen beard, and still thick
flaxen hair. His eyes were somehow too blue and their expression somehow too
heavy and fixed. There was something awfully unpleasant in that handsome
face, which looked so wonderfully young for his age. Svidrigaïlov was smartly
dressed in light summer clothes and was particularly dainty in his linen. He wore
a huge ring with a precious stone in it.
“Have I got to bother myself about you, too, now?” said Raskolnikov
suddenly, coming with nervous impatience straight to the point. “Even though
perhaps you are the most dangerous man if you care to injure me, I don’t want to
put myself out any more. I will show you at once that I don’t prize myself as you
probably think I do. I’ve come to tell you at once that if you keep to your former
intentions with regard to my sister and if you think to derive any benefit in that
direction from what has been discovered of late, I will kill you before you get me
locked up. You can reckon on my word. You know that I can keep it. And in the
second place if you want to tell me anything—for I keep fancying all this time
that you have something to tell me—make haste and tell it, for time is precious
and very likely it will soon be too late.”