“Well, what then!” Ilya Petrovitch drawled with gentlemanly nonchalance;
and he walked with some papers to another table, with a jaunty swing of his
shoulders at each step. “Here, if you will kindly look: an author, or a student, has
been one at least, does not pay his debts, has given an I O U, won’t clear out of
his room, and complaints are constantly being lodged against him, and here he
has been pleased to make a protest against my smoking in his presence! He
behaves like a cad himself, and just look at him, please. Here’s the gentleman,
and very attractive he is!”
“Poverty is not a vice, my friend, but we know you go off like powder, you
can’t bear a slight, I daresay you took offence at something and went too far
yourself,” continued Nikodim Fomitch, turning affably to Raskolnikov. “But you
were wrong there; he is a capital fellow, I assure you, but explosive, explosive!
He gets hot, fires up, boils over, and no stopping him! And then it’s all over!
And at the bottom he’s a heart of gold! His nickname in the regiment was the
Explosive Lieutenant....”
“And what a regiment it was, too,” cried Ilya Petrovitch, much gratified at this
agreeable banter, though still sulky.
Raskolnikov had a sudden desire to say something exceptionally pleasant to
them all. “Excuse me, Captain,” he began easily, suddenly addressing Nikodim
Fomitch, “will you enter into my position?... I am ready to ask pardon, if I have
been ill-mannered. I am a poor student, sick and shattered (shattered was the
word he used) by poverty. I am not studying, because I cannot keep myself now,
but I shall get money.... I have a mother and sister in the province of X. They
will send it to me, and I will pay. My landlady is a good-hearted woman, but she
is so exasperated at my having lost my lessons, and not paying her for the last
four months, that she does not even send up my dinner... and I don’t understand
this I O U at all. She is asking me to pay her on this I O U. How am I to pay her?
Judge for yourselves!...”
“But that is not our business, you know,” the head clerk was observing.
“Yes, yes. I perfectly agree with you. But allow me to explain...” Raskolnikov
put in again, still addressing Nikodim Fomitch, but trying his best to address Ilya
Petrovitch also, though the latter persistently appeared to be rummaging among
his papers and to be contemptuously oblivious of him. “Allow me to explain that
I have been living with her for nearly three years and at first... at first... for why
should I not confess it, at the very beginning I promised to marry her daughter, it
was a verbal promise, freely given... she was a girl... indeed, I liked her, though I
was not in love with her... a youthful affair in fact... that is, I mean to say, that
my landlady gave me credit freely in those days, and I led a life of... I was very
heedless...” 
