“My name!”
“I should think so; and yet a General Kobelev they could not find while I was
there. Well, it’s a long story. But as soon as I did land on this place, I soon got to
know all your affairs—all, all, brother, I know everything; Nastasya here will tell
you. I made the acquaintance of Nikodim Fomitch and Ilya Petrovitch, and the
house-porter and Mr. Zametov, Alexandr Grigorievitch, the head clerk in the
police office, and, last, but not least, of Pashenka; Nastasya here knows....”
“He’s got round her,” Nastasya murmured, smiling slyly.
“Why don’t you put the sugar in your tea, Nastasya Nikiforovna?”
“You are a one!” Nastasya cried suddenly, going off into a giggle. “I am not
Nikiforovna, but Petrovna,” she added suddenly, recovering from her mirth.
“I’ll make a note of it. Well, brother, to make a long story short, I was going in
for a regular explosion here to uproot all malignant influences in the locality, but
Pashenka won the day. I had not expected, brother, to find her so...
prepossessing. Eh, what do you think?”
Raskolnikov did not speak, but he still kept his eyes fixed upon him, full of
alarm.
“And all that could be wished, indeed, in every respect,” Razumihin went on,
not at all embarrassed by his silence.
“Ah, the sly dog!” Nastasya shrieked again. This conversation afforded her
unspeakable delight.
“It’s a pity, brother, that you did not set to work in the right way at first. You
ought to have approached her differently. She is, so to speak, a most
unaccountable character. But we will talk about her character later.... How could
you let things come to such a pass that she gave up sending you your dinner?
And that I O U? You must have been mad to sign an I O U. And that promise of
marriage when her daughter, Natalya Yegorovna, was alive?... I know all about
it! But I see that’s a delicate matter and I am an ass; forgive me. But, talking of
foolishness, do you know Praskovya Pavlovna is not nearly so foolish as you
would think at first sight?”
“No,” mumbled Raskolnikov, looking away, but feeling that it was better to
keep up the conversation.
“She isn’t, is she?” cried Razumihin, delighted to get an answer out of him.
“But she is not very clever either, eh? She is essentially, essentially an
unaccountable character! I am sometimes quite at a loss, I assure you.... She
must be forty; she says she is thirty-six, and of course she has every right to say
so. But I swear I judge her intellectually, simply from the metaphysical point of
view; there is a sort of symbolism sprung up between us, a sort of algebra or
what not! I don’t understand it! Well, that’s all nonsense. Only, seeing that you
are not a student now and have lost your lessons and your clothes, and that
through the young lady’s death she has no need to treat you as a relation, she
suddenly took fright; and as you hid in your den and dropped all your old
relations with her, she planned to get rid of you. And she’s been cherishing that
design a long time, but was sorry to lose the I O U, for you assured her yourself
that your mother would pay.” 
