It would be difficult to explain exactly what could have originated the idea of
that senseless dinner in Katerina Ivanovna’s disordered brain. Nearly ten of the
twenty roubles, given by Raskolnikov for Marmeladov’s funeral, were wasted
upon it. Possibly Katerina Ivanovna felt obliged to honour the memory of the
deceased “suitably,” that all the lodgers, and still more Amalia Ivanovna, might
know “that he was in no way their inferior, and perhaps very much their
superior,” and that no one had the right “to turn up his nose at him.” Perhaps the
chief element was that peculiar “poor man’s pride,” which compels many poor
people to spend their last savings on some traditional social ceremony, simply in
order to do “like other people,” and not to “be looked down upon.” It is very
probable, too, that Katerina Ivanovna longed on this occasion, at the moment
when she seemed to be abandoned by everyone, to show those “wretched
contemptible lodgers” that she knew “how to do things, how to entertain” and
that she had been brought up “in a genteel, she might almost say aristocratic
colonel’s family” and had not been meant for sweeping floors and washing the
children’s rags at night. Even the poorest and most broken-spirited people are
sometimes liable to these paroxysms of pride and vanity which take the form of
an irresistible nervous craving. And Katerina Ivanovna was not broken-spirited;
she might have been killed by circumstance, but her spirit could not have been
broken, that is, she could not have been intimidated, her will could not be
crushed. Moreover Sonia had said with good reason that her mind was unhinged.
She could not be said to be insane, but for a year past she had been so harassed
that her mind might well be overstrained. The later stages of consumption are
apt, doctors tell us, to affect the intellect.
There was no great variety of wines, nor was there Madeira; but wine there
was. There was vodka, rum and Lisbon wine, all of the poorest quality but in
sufficient quantity. Besides the traditional rice and honey, there were three or
four dishes, one of which consisted of pancakes, all prepared in Amalia
Ivanovna’s kitchen. Two samovars were boiling, that tea and punch might be
offered after dinner. Katerina Ivanovna had herself seen to purchasing the
provisions, with the help of one of the lodgers, an unfortunate little Pole who had
somehow been stranded at Madame Lippevechsel’s.