Katerina Ivanovna, however, put off expressing her feelings for the time and
contented herself with treating her coldly, though she decided inwardly that she
would certainly have to put Amalia Ivanovna down and set her in her proper
place, for goodness only knew what she was fancying herself. Katerina Ivanovna
was irritated too by the fact that hardly any of the lodgers invited had come to
the funeral, except the Pole who had just managed to run into the cemetery,
while to the memorial dinner the poorest and most insignificant of them had
turned up, the wretched creatures, many of them not quite sober. The older and
more respectable of them all, as if by common consent, stayed away. Pyotr
Petrovitch Luzhin, for instance, who might be said to be the most respectable of
all the lodgers, did not appear, though Katerina Ivanovna had the evening before
told all the world, that is Amalia Ivanovna, Polenka, Sonia and the Pole, that he
was the most generous, noble-hearted man with a large property and vast
connections, who had been a friend of her first husband’s, and a guest in her
father’s house, and that he had promised to use all his influence to secure her a
considerable pension. It must be noted that when Katerina Ivanovna exalted
anyone’s connections and fortune, it was without any ulterior motive, quite
disinterestedly, for the mere pleasure of adding to the consequence of the person
praised. Probably “taking his cue” from Luzhin, “that contemptible wretch
Lebeziatnikov had not turned up either. What did he fancy himself? He was only
asked out of kindness and because he was sharing the same room with Pyotr
Petrovitch and was a friend of his, so that it would have been awkward not to
invite him.”
Among those who failed to appear were “the genteel lady and her old-maidish
daughter,” who had only been lodgers in the house for the last fortnight, but had
several times complained of the noise and uproar in Katerina Ivanovna’s room,
especially when Marmeladov had come back drunk. Katerina Ivanovna heard
this from Amalia Ivanovna who, quarrelling with Katerina Ivanovna, and
threatening to turn the whole family out of doors, had shouted at her that they
“were not worth the foot” of the honourable lodgers whom they were disturbing.
Katerina Ivanovna determined now to invite this lady and her daughter, “whose
foot she was not worth,” and who had turned away haughtily when she casually
met them, so that they might know that “she was more noble in her thoughts and
feelings and did not harbour malice,” and might see that she was not accustomed
to her way of living. She had proposed to make this clear to them at dinner with
allusions to her late father’s governorship, and also at the same time to hint that
it was exceedingly stupid of them to turn away on meeting her. The fat colonelmajor
(he was really a discharged officer of low rank) was also absent, but it
appeared that he had been “not himself” for the last two days. The party
consisted of the Pole, a wretched looking clerk with a spotty face and a greasy
coat, who had not a word to say for himself, and smelt abominably, a deaf and
almost blind old man who had once been in the post office and who had been
from immemorial ages maintained by someone at Amalia Ivanovna’s.