Raskolnikov fancied that the head clerk treated him more casually and
contemptuously after his speech, but strange to say he suddenly felt completely
indifferent to anyone’s opinion, and this revulsion took place in a flash, in one
instant. If he had cared to think a little, he would have been amazed indeed that
he could have talked to them like that a minute before, forcing his feelings upon
them. And where had those feelings come from? Now if the whole room had
been filled, not with police officers, but with those nearest and dearest to him, he
would not have found one human word for them, so empty was his heart. A
gloomy sensation of agonising, everlasting solitude and remoteness, took
conscious form in his soul. It was not the meanness of his sentimental effusions
before Ilya Petrovitch, nor the meanness of the latter’s triumph over him that had
caused this sudden revulsion in his heart. Oh, what had he to do now with his
own baseness, with all these petty vanities, officers, German women, debts,
police-offices? If he had been sentenced to be burnt at that moment, he would
not have stirred, would hardly have heard the sentence to the end. Something
was happening to him entirely new, sudden and unknown. It was not that he
understood, but he felt clearly with all the intensity of sensation that he could
never more appeal to these people in the police-office with sentimental effusions
like his recent outburst, or with anything whatever; and that if they had been his
own brothers and sisters and not police-officers, it would have been utterly out
of the question to appeal to them in any circumstance of life. He had never
experienced such a strange and awful sensation. And what was most agonising—
it was more a sensation than a conception or idea, a direct sensation, the most
agonising of all the sensations he had known in his life.
The head clerk began dictating to him the usual form of declaration, that he
could not pay, that he undertook to do so at a future date, that he would not leave
the town, nor sell his property, and so on.
“But you can’t write, you can hardly hold the pen,” observed the head clerk,
looking with curiosity at Raskolnikov. “Are you ill?”
“Yes, I am giddy. Go on!”
“That’s all. Sign it.”
The head clerk took the paper, and turned to attend to others.
 
