“She is first-rate,” he said. “You can always get money from her. She is as rich
as a Jew, she can give you five thousand roubles at a time and she is not above
taking a pledge for a rouble. Lots of our fellows have had dealings with her. But
she is an awful old harpy....”
And he began describing how spiteful and uncertain she was, how if you were
only a day late with your interest the pledge was lost; how she gave a quarter of
the value of an article and took five and even seven percent a month on it and so
on. The student chattered on, saying that she had a sister Lizaveta, whom the
wretched little creature was continually beating, and kept in complete bondage
like a small child, though Lizaveta was at least six feet high.
“There’s a phenomenon for you,” cried the student and he laughed.
They began talking about Lizaveta. The student spoke about her with a
peculiar relish and was continually laughing and the officer listened with great
interest and asked him to send Lizaveta to do some mending for him.
Raskolnikov did not miss a word and learned everything about her. Lizaveta was
younger than the old woman and was her half-sister, being the child of a
different mother. She was thirty-five. She worked day and night for her sister,
and besides doing the cooking and the washing, she did sewing and worked as a
charwoman and gave her sister all she earned. She did not dare to accept an
order or job of any kind without her sister’s permission. The old woman had
already made her will, and Lizaveta knew of it, and by this will she would not
get a farthing; nothing but the movables, chairs and so on; all the money was left
to a monastery in the province of N——, that prayers might be said for her in
perpetuity. Lizaveta was of lower rank than her sister, unmarried and awfully
uncouth in appearance, remarkably tall with long feet that looked as if they were
bent outwards. She always wore battered goatskin shoes, and was clean in her
person. What the student expressed most surprise and amusement about was the
fact that Lizaveta was continually with child.
“But you say she is hideous?” observed the officer.
“Yes, she is so dark-skinned and looks like a soldier dressed up, but you know
she is not at all hideous. She has such a good-natured face and eyes. Strikingly
so. And the proof of it is that lots of people are attracted by her. She is such a
soft, gentle creature, ready to put up with anything, always willing, willing to do
anything. And her smile is really very sweet.”
“You seem to find her attractive yourself,” laughed the officer.
“From her queerness. No, I’ll tell you what. I could kill that damned old
woman and make off with her money, I assure you, without the faintest
conscience-prick,” the student added with warmth. The officer laughed again
while Raskolnikov shuddered. How strange it was! 
