“Since then, sir,” he went on after a brief pause—“Since then, owing to an
unfortunate occurrence and through information given by evil-intentioned
persons—in all which Darya Frantsovna took a leading part on the pretext that
she had been treated with want of respect—since then my daughter Sofya
Semyonovna has been forced to take a yellow ticket, and owing to that she is
unable to go on living with us. For our landlady, Amalia Fyodorovna would not
hear of it (though she had backed up Darya Frantsovna before) and Mr.
Lebeziatnikov too... hm.... All the trouble between him and Katerina Ivanovna
was on Sonia’s account. At first he was for making up to Sonia himself and then
all of a sudden he stood on his dignity: ‘how,’ said he, ‘can a highly educated
man like me live in the same rooms with a girl like that?’ And Katerina Ivanovna
would not let it pass, she stood up for her... and so that’s how it happened. And
Sonia comes to us now, mostly after dark; she comforts Katerina Ivanovna and
gives her all she can.... She has a room at the Kapernaumovs’ the tailors, she
lodges with them; Kapernaumov is a lame man with a cleft palate and all of his
numerous family have cleft palates too. And his wife, too, has a cleft palate.
They all live in one room, but Sonia has her own, partitioned off.... Hm... yes...
very poor people and all with cleft palates... yes. Then I got up in the morning,
and put on my rags, lifted up my hands to heaven and set off to his excellency
Ivan Afanasyvitch. His excellency Ivan Afanasyvitch, do you know him? No?
Well, then, it’s a man of God you don’t know. He is wax... wax before the face of
the Lord; even as wax melteth!... His eyes were dim when he heard my story.
‘Marmeladov, once already you have deceived my expectations... I’ll take you
once more on my own responsibility’—that’s what he said, ‘remember,’ he said,
‘and now you can go.’ I kissed the dust at his feet—in thought only, for in reality
he would not have allowed me to do it, being a statesman and a man of modern
political and enlightened ideas. I returned home, and when I announced that I’d
been taken back into the service and should receive a salary, heavens, what a todo there was!...”
Marmeladov stopped again in violent excitement. At that moment a whole
party of revellers already drunk came in from the street, and the sounds of a
hired concertina and the cracked piping voice of a child of seven singing “The
Hamlet” were heard in the entry. The room was filled with noise. The tavernkeeper and the boys were busy with the new-comers. Marmeladov paying no
attention to the new arrivals continued his story. He appeared by now to be
extremely weak, but as he became more and more drunk, he became more and
more talkative. The recollection of his recent success in getting the situation
seemed to revive him, and was positively reflected in a sort of radiance on his
face. Raskolnikov listened attentively 
