Raskolnikov had been a vigorous and active champion of Sonia against
Luzhin, although he had such a load of horror and anguish in his own heart. But
having gone through so much in the morning, he found a sort of relief in a
change of sensations, apart from the strong personal feeling which impelled him
to defend Sonia. He was agitated too, especially at some moments, by the
thought of his approaching interview with Sonia: he had to tell her who had
killed Lizaveta. He knew the terrible suffering it would be to him and, as it were,
brushed away the thought of it. So when he cried as he left Katerina Ivanovna’s,
“Well, Sofya Semyonovna, we shall see what you’ll say now!” he was still
superficially excited, still vigorous and defiant from his triumph over Luzhin.
But, strange to say, by the time he reached Sonia’s lodging, he felt a sudden
impotence and fear. He stood still in hesitation at the door, asking himself the
strange question: “Must he tell her who killed Lizaveta?” It was a strange
question because he felt at the very time not only that he could not help telling
her, but also that he could not put off the telling. He did not yet know why it
must be so, he only felt it, and the agonising sense of his impotence before the
inevitable almost crushed him. To cut short his hesitation and suffering, he
quickly opened the door and looked at Sonia from the doorway. She was sitting
with her elbows on the table and her face in her hands, but seeing Raskolnikov
she got up at once and came to meet him as though she were expecting him.
“What would have become of me but for you?” she said quickly, meeting him
in the middle of the room.
Evidently she was in haste to say this to him. It was what she had been
waiting for.
Raskolnikov went to the table and sat down on the chair from which she had
only just risen. She stood facing him, two steps away, just as she had done the
day before.
“Well, Sonia?” he said, and felt that his voice was trembling, “it was all due to
‘your social position and the habits associated with it.’ Did you understand that
just now?”
Her face showed her distress.
“Only don’t talk to me as you did yesterday,” she interrupted him. “Please
don’t begin it. There is misery enough without that.”