“It was my mistake, too, not to have given them money,” he thought, as he
returned dejectedly to Lebeziatnikov’s room, “and why on earth was I such a
Jew? It was false economy! I meant to keep them without a penny so that they
should turn to me as their providence, and look at them! foo! If I’d spent some
fifteen hundred roubles on them for the trousseau and presents, on knick-knacks,
dressing-cases, jewellery, materials, and all that sort of trash from Knopp’s and
the English shop, my position would have been better and... stronger! They
could not have refused me so easily! They are the sort of people that would feel
bound to return money and presents if they broke it off; and they would find it
hard to do it! And their conscience would prick them: how can we dismiss a man
who has hitherto been so generous and delicate?.... H’m! I’ve made a blunder.”
And grinding his teeth again, Pyotr Petrovitch called himself a fool—but not
aloud, of course.
He returned home, twice as irritated and angry as before. The preparations for
the funeral dinner at Katerina Ivanovna’s excited his curiosity as he passed. He
had heard about it the day before; he fancied, indeed, that he had been invited,
but absorbed in his own cares he had paid no attention. Inquiring of Madame
Lippevechsel who was busy laying the table while Katerina Ivanovna was away
at the cemetery, he heard that the entertainment was to be a great affair, that all
the lodgers had been invited, among them some who had not known the dead
man, that even Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov was invited in spite of his
previous quarrel with Katerina Ivanovna, that he, Pyotr Petrovitch, was not only
invited, but was eagerly expected as he was the most important of the lodgers.
Amalia Ivanovna herself had been invited with great ceremony in spite of the
recent unpleasantness, and so she was very busy with preparations and was
taking a positive pleasure in them; she was moreover dressed up to the nines, all
in new black silk, and she was proud of it. All this suggested an idea to Pyotr
Petrovitch and he went into his room, or rather Lebeziatnikov’s, somewhat
thoughtful. He had learnt that Raskolnikov was to be one of the guests.