“That’s as you like, but Sofya Semyonovna is not at home. She has taken the
three children to an old lady of high rank, the patroness of some orphan asylums,
whom I used to know years ago. I charmed the old lady by depositing a sum of
money with her to provide for the three children of Katerina Ivanovna and
subscribing to the institution as well. I told her too the story of Sofya
Semyonovna in full detail, suppressing nothing. It produced an indescribable
effect on her. That’s why Sofya Semyonovna has been invited to call to-day at
the X. Hotel where the lady is staying for the time.”
“No matter, I’ll come all the same.”
“As you like, it’s nothing to me, but I won’t come with you; here we are at
home. By the way, I am convinced that you regard me with suspicion just
because I have shown such delicacy and have not so far troubled you with
questions... you understand? It struck you as extraordinary; I don’t mind betting
it’s that. Well, it teaches one to show delicacy!”
“And to listen at doors!”
“Ah, that’s it, is it?” laughed Svidrigaïlov. “Yes, I should have been surprised
if you had let that pass after all that has happened. Ha-ha! Though I did
understand something of the pranks you had been up to and were telling Sofya
Semyonovna about, what was the meaning of it? Perhaps I am quite behind the
times and can’t understand. For goodness’ sake, explain it, my dear boy.
Expound the latest theories!”
“You couldn’t have heard anything. You’re making it all up!”
“But I’m not talking about that (though I did hear something). No, I’m talking
of the way you keep sighing and groaning now. The Schiller in you is in revolt
every moment, and now you tell me not to listen at doors. If that’s how you feel,
go and inform the police that you had this mischance: you made a little mistake
in your theory. But if you are convinced that one mustn’t listen at doors, but one
may murder old women at one’s pleasure, you’d better be off to America and
make haste. Run, young man! There may still be time. I’m speaking sincerely.
Haven’t you the money? I’ll give you the fare.”
“I’m not thinking of that at all,” Raskolnikov interrupted with disgust.
“I understand (but don’t put yourself out, don’t discuss it if you don’t want to).
I understand the questions you are worrying over—moral ones, aren’t they?
Duties of citizen and man? Lay them all aside. They are nothing to you now, haha!
You’ll say you are still a man and a citizen. If so you ought not to have got
into this coil. It’s no use taking up a job you are not fit for. Well, you’d better
shoot yourself, or don’t you want to?”
“You seem trying to enrage me, to make me leave you.”