 I, of course, understood very
little of it, but Dounia explained to me that, though he is not a man of great
education, he is clever and seems to be good-natured. You know your sister’s
character, Rodya. She is a resolute, sensible, patient and generous girl, but she
has a passionate heart, as I know very well. Of course, there is no great love
either on his side, or on hers, but Dounia is a clever girl and has the heart of an
angel, and will make it her duty to make her husband happy who on his side will
make her happiness his care. Of that we have no good reason to doubt, though it
must be admitted the matter has been arranged in great haste. Besides he is a
man of great prudence and he will see, to be sure, of himself, that his own
happiness will be the more secure, the happier Dounia is with him. And as for
some defects of character, for some habits and even certain differences of
opinion—which indeed are inevitable even in the happiest marriages—Dounia
has said that, as regards all that, she relies on herself, that there is nothing to be
uneasy about, and that she is ready to put up with a great deal, if only their future
relationship can be an honourable and straightforward one. He struck me, for
instance, at first, as rather abrupt, but that may well come from his being an
outspoken man, and that is no doubt how it is. For instance, at his second visit,
after he had received Dounia’s consent, in the course of conversation, he
declared that before making Dounia’s acquaintance, he had made up his mind to
marry a girl of good reputation, without dowry and, above all, one who had
experienced poverty, because, as he explained, a man ought not to be indebted to
his wife, but that it is better for a wife to look upon her husband as her
benefactor. I must add that he expressed it more nicely and politely than I have
done, for I have forgotten his actual phrases and only remember the meaning.
And, besides, it was obviously not said of design, but slipped out in the heat of
conversation, so that he tried afterwards to correct himself and smooth it over,
but all the same it did strike me as somewhat rude, and I said so afterwards to
Dounia. But Dounia was vexed, and answered that ‘words are not deeds,’ and
that, of course, is perfectly true. Dounia did not sleep all night before she made
up her mind, and, thinking that I was asleep, she got out of bed and was walking
up and down the room all night; at last she knelt down before the ikon and
prayed long and fervently and in the morning she told me that she had decided. 
