“Your mamma,” began Luzhin.
“Hm!” Razumihin cleared his throat loudly. Luzhin looked at him inquiringly.
“That’s all right, go on.”
Luzhin shrugged his shoulders.
“Your mamma had commenced a letter to you while I was sojourning in her
neighbourhood. On my arrival here I purposely allowed a few days to elapse
before coming to see you, in order that I might be fully assured that you were in
full possession of the tidings; but now, to my astonishment...”
“I know, I know!” Raskolnikov cried suddenly with impatient vexation. “So
you are the fiancé? I know, and that’s enough!”
There was no doubt about Pyotr Petrovitch’s being offended this time, but he
said nothing. He made a violent effort to understand what it all meant. There was
a moment’s silence.
Meanwhile Raskolnikov, who had turned a little towards him when he
answered, began suddenly staring at him again with marked curiosity, as though
he had not had a good look at him yet, or as though something new had struck
him; he rose from his pillow on purpose to stare at him. There certainly was
something peculiar in Pyotr Petrovitch’s whole appearance, something which
seemed to justify the title of “fiancé” so unceremoniously applied to him. In the
first place, it was evident, far too much so indeed, that Pyotr Petrovitch had
made eager use of his few days in the capital to get himself up and rig himself
out in expectation of his betrothed—a perfectly innocent and permissible
proceeding, indeed. Even his own, perhaps too complacent, consciousness of the
agreeable improvement in his appearance might have been forgiven in such
circumstances, seeing that Pyotr Petrovitch had taken up the rôle of fiancé. All
his clothes were fresh from the tailor’s and were all right, except for being too
new and too distinctly appropriate. Even the stylish new round hat had the same
significance. Pyotr Petrovitch treated it too respectfully and held it too carefully
in his hands. The exquisite pair of lavender gloves, real Louvain, told the same
tale, if only from the fact of his not wearing them, but carrying them in his hand
for show. Light and youthful colours predominated in Pyotr Petrovitch’s attire.
He wore a charming summer jacket of a fawn shade, light thin trousers, a
waistcoat of the same, new and fine linen, a cravat of the lightest cambric with
pink stripes on it, and the best of it was, this all suited Pyotr Petrovitch. His very
fresh and even handsome face looked younger than his forty-five years at all
times. His dark, mutton-chop whiskers made an agreeable setting on both sides,
growing thickly upon his shining, clean-shaven chin. Even his hair, touched here
and there with grey, though it had been combed and curled at a hairdresser’s, did
not give him a stupid appearance, as curled hair usually does, by inevitably
suggesting a German on his wedding-day. If there really was something
unpleasing and repulsive in his rather good-looking and imposing countenance,
it was due to quite other causes. After scanning Mr. Luzhin unceremoniously,
Raskolnikov smiled malignantly, sank back on the pillow and stared at the
ceiling as before. 
