“The silver cigarette case; I spoke of it last time, you know.”
She held out her hand.
“But how pale you are, to be sure... and your hands are trembling too? Have
you been bathing, or what?”
“Fever,” he answered abruptly. “You can’t help getting pale... if you’ve
nothing to eat,” he added, with difficulty articulating the words.
His strength was failing him again. But his answer sounded like the truth; the
old woman took the pledge.
“What is it?” she asked once more, scanning Raskolnikov intently, and
weighing the pledge in her hand.
“A thing... cigarette case.... Silver.... Look at it.”
“It does not seem somehow like silver.... How he has wrapped it up!”
Trying to untie the string and turning to the window, to the light (all her
windows were shut, in spite of the stifling heat), she left him altogether for some
seconds and stood with her back to him. He unbuttoned his coat and freed the
axe from the noose, but did not yet take it out altogether, simply holding it in his
right hand under the coat. His hands were fearfully weak, he felt them every
moment growing more numb and more wooden. He was afraid he would let the
axe slip and fall.... A sudden giddiness came over him.
“But what has he tied it up like this for?” the old woman cried with vexation
and moved towards him.
He had not a minute more to lose. He pulled the axe quite out, swung it with
both arms, scarcely conscious of himself, and almost without effort, almost
mechanically, brought the blunt side down on her head. He seemed not to use his
own strength in this. But as soon as he had once brought the axe down, his
strength returned to him.
The old woman was as always bareheaded. Her thin, light hair, streaked with
grey, thickly smeared with grease, was plaited in a rat’s tail and fastened by a
broken horn comb which stood out on the nape of her neck. As she was so short,
the blow fell on the very top of her skull. She cried out, but very faintly, and
suddenly sank all of a heap on the floor, raising her hands to her head. In one
hand she still held “the pledge.” Then he dealt her another and another blow with
the blunt side and on the same spot. The blood gushed as from an overturned
glass, the body fell back. He stepped back, let it fall, and at once bent over her
face; she was dead. Her eyes seemed to be starting out of their sockets, the brow
and the whole face were drawn and contorted convulsively. 
