For she had
nowhere to turn! Do you understand, sir, do you understand what it means when
you have absolutely nowhere to turn? No, that you don’t understand yet.... And
for a whole year, I performed my duties conscientiously and faithfully, and did
not touch this” (he tapped the jug with his finger), “for I have feelings. But even
so, I could not please her; and then I lost my place too, and that through no fault
of mine but through changes in the office; and then I did touch it!... It will be a
year and a half ago soon since we found ourselves at last after many wanderings
and numerous calamities in this magnificent capital, adorned with innumerable
monuments. Here I obtained a situation.... I obtained it and I lost it again. Do
you understand? This time it was through my own fault I lost it: for my
weakness had come out.... We have now part of a room at Amalia Fyodorovna
Lippevechsel’s; and what we live upon and what we pay our rent with, I could
not say. There are a lot of people living there besides ourselves. Dirt and
disorder, a perfect Bedlam... hm... yes... And meanwhile my daughter by my first
wife has grown up; and what my daughter has had to put up with from her stepmother whilst she was growing up, I won’t speak of. For, though Katerina
Ivanovna is full of generous feelings, she is a spirited lady, irritable and shorttempered.... Yes. But it’s no use going over that! Sonia, as you may well fancy,
has had no education. I did make an effort four years ago to give her a course of
geography and universal history, but as I was not very well up in those subjects
myself and we had no suitable books, and what books we had... hm, anyway we
have not even those now, so all our instruction came to an end. We stopped at
Cyrus of Persia. Since she has attained years of maturity, she has read other
books of romantic tendency and of late she had read with great interest a book
she got through Mr. Lebeziatnikov, Lewes’ Physiology—do you know it?—and
even recounted extracts from it to us: and that’s the whole of her education. And
now may I venture to address you, honoured sir, on my own account with a
private question. Do you suppose that a respectable poor girl can earn much by
honest work? Not fifteen farthings a day can she earn, if she is respectable and
has no special talent and that without putting her work down for an instant! And
what’s more, Ivan Ivanitch Klopstock the civil counsellor—have you heard of
him?—has not to this day paid her for the half-dozen linen shirts she made him
and drove her roughly away, stamping and reviling her, on the pretext that the
shirt collars were not made like the pattern and were put in askew. And there are
the little ones hungry.... And Katerina Ivanovna walking up and down and
wringing her hands, her cheeks flushed red, as they always are in that disease:
‘Here you live with us,’ says she, ‘you eat and drink and are kept warm and you
do nothing to help.’ And much she gets to eat and drink when there is not a crust
for the little ones for three days! 
