“Is he expecting anything?”
“You are certainly quite right about it,” Porfiry began gaily, looking with
extraordinary simplicity at Raskolnikov (which startled him and instantly put
him on his guard); “certainly quite right in laughing so wittily at our legal forms,
he-he! Some of these elaborate psychological methods are exceedingly
ridiculous and perhaps useless, if one adheres too closely to the forms. Yes... I
am talking of forms again. Well, if I recognise, or more strictly speaking, if I
suspect someone or other to be a criminal in any case entrusted to me... you’re
reading for the law, of course, Rodion Romanovitch?”
“Yes, I was...”
“Well, then it is a precedent for you for the future—though don’t suppose I
should venture to instruct you after the articles you publish about crime! No, I
simply make bold to state it by way of fact, if I took this man or that for a
criminal, why, I ask, should I worry him prematurely, even though I had
evidence against him? In one case I may be bound, for instance, to arrest a man
at once, but another may be in quite a different position, you know, so why
shouldn’t I let him walk about the town a bit? he-he-he! But I see you don’t quite
understand, so I’ll give you a clearer example. If I put him in prison too soon, I
may very likely give him, so to speak, moral support, he-he! You’re laughing?”
Raskolnikov had no idea of laughing. He was sitting with compressed lips, his
feverish eyes fixed on Porfiry Petrovitch’s.
“Yet that is the case, with some types especially, for men are so different. You
say ‘evidence’. Well, there may be evidence. But evidence, you know, can
generally be taken two ways. I am an examining lawyer and a weak man, I
confess it. I should like to make a proof, so to say, mathematically clear. I should
like to make a chain of evidence such as twice two are four, it ought to be a
direct, irrefutable proof! And if I shut him up too soon—even though I might be
convinced he was the man, I should very likely be depriving myself of the means
of getting further evidence against him. And how? By giving him, so to speak, a
definite position, I shall put him out of suspense and set his mind at rest, so that
he will retreat into his shell. They say that at Sevastopol, soon after Alma, the
clever people were in a terrible fright that the enemy would attack openly and
take Sevastopol at once. But when they saw that the enemy preferred a regular
siege, they were delighted, I am told and reassured, for the thing would drag on
for two months at least. You’re laughing, you don’t believe me again? Of course,
you’re right, too. You’re right, you’re right. These are special cases, I admit. But
you must observe this, my dear Rodion Romanovitch, the general case, the case
for which all legal forms and rules are intended, for which they are calculated
and laid down in books, does not exist at all, for the reason that every case, every
crime, for instance, so soon as it actually occurs, at once becomes a thoroughly
special case and sometimes a case unlike any that’s gone before. Very comic
cases of that sort sometimes occur.