“Upon my word,” Luzhin cried wrathfully and irritably, crimson with
confusion, “to distort my words in this way! Excuse me, allow me to assure you
that the report which has reached you, or rather, let me say, has been conveyed to
you, has no foundation in truth, and I... suspect who... in a word... this arrow... in
a word, your mamma... She seemed to me in other things, with all her excellent
qualities, of a somewhat high-flown and romantic way of thinking.... But I was a
thousand miles from supposing that she would misunderstand and misrepresent
things in so fanciful a way.... And indeed... indeed...”
“I tell you what,” cried Raskolnikov, raising himself on his pillow and fixing
his piercing, glittering eyes upon him, “I tell you what.”
“What?” Luzhin stood still, waiting with a defiant and offended face. Silence
lasted for some seconds.
“Why, if ever again... you dare to mention a single word... about my mother...
I shall send you flying downstairs!”
“What’s the matter with you?” cried Razumihin.
“So that’s how it is?” Luzhin turned pale and bit his lip. “Let me tell you, sir,”
he began deliberately, doing his utmost to restrain himself but breathing hard, “at
the first moment I saw you you were ill-disposed to me, but I remained here on
purpose to find out more. I could forgive a great deal in a sick man and a
connection, but you... never after this...”
“I am not ill,” cried Raskolnikov.
“So much the worse...”
“Go to hell!”
But Luzhin was already leaving without finishing his speech, squeezing
between the table and the chair; Razumihin got up this time to let him pass.
Without glancing at anyone, and not even nodding to Zossimov, who had for
some time been making signs to him to let the sick man alone, he went out,
lifting his hat to the level of his shoulders to avoid crushing it as he stooped to
go out of the door. And even the curve of his spine was expressive of the
horrible insult he had received.
“How could you—how could you!” Razumihin said, shaking his head in
perplexity. 
