Suddenly he remembered that the purse and the things he had taken out of the
old woman’s box were still in his pockets! He had not thought till then of taking
them out and hiding them! He had not even thought of them while he was
examining his clothes! What next? Instantly he rushed to take them out and fling
them on the table. When he had pulled out everything, and turned the pocket
inside out to be sure there was nothing left, he carried the whole heap to the
corner. The paper had come off the bottom of the wall and hung there in tatters.
He began stuffing all the things into the hole under the paper: “They’re in! All
out of sight, and the purse too!” he thought gleefully, getting up and gazing
blankly at the hole which bulged out more than ever. Suddenly he shuddered all
over with horror; “My God!” he whispered in despair: “what’s the matter with
me? Is that hidden? Is that the way to hide things?”
He had not reckoned on having trinkets to hide. He had only thought of
money, and so had not prepared a hiding-place.
“But now, now, what am I glad of?” he thought, “Is that hiding things? My
reason’s deserting me—simply!”
He sat down on the sofa in exhaustion and was at once shaken by another
unbearable fit of shivering. Mechanically he drew from a chair beside him his
old student’s winter coat, which was still warm though almost in rags, covered
himself up with it and once more sank into drowsiness and delirium. He lost
consciousness.
Not more than five minutes had passed when he jumped up a second time, and
at once pounced in a frenzy on his clothes again.
“How could I go to sleep again with nothing done? Yes, yes; I have not taken
the loop off the armhole! I forgot it, forgot a thing like that! Such a piece of
evidence!”
He pulled off the noose, hurriedly cut it to pieces and threw the bits among his
linen under the pillow.
“Pieces of torn linen couldn’t rouse suspicion, whatever happened; I think not,
I think not, any way!” he repeated, standing in the middle of the room, and with
painful concentration he fell to gazing about him again, at the floor and
everywhere, trying to make sure he had not forgotten anything. The conviction
that all his faculties, even memory, and the simplest power of reflection were
failing him, began to be an insufferable torture.
“Surely it isn’t beginning already! Surely it isn’t my punishment coming upon
me? It is!”
 
