When he reached these conclusions, he decided that in his own case there
could not be such a morbid reaction, that his reason and will would remain
unimpaired at the time of carrying out his design, for the simple reason that his
design was “not a crime....” We will omit all the process by means of which he
arrived at this last conclusion; we have run too far ahead already.... We may add
only that the practical, purely material difficulties of the affair occupied a
secondary position in his mind. “One has but to keep all one’s will-power and
reason to deal with them, and they will all be overcome at the time when once
one has familiarised oneself with the minutest details of the business....” But this
preparation had never been begun. His final decisions were what he came to trust
least, and when the hour struck, it all came to pass quite differently, as it were
accidentally and unexpectedly.
One trifling circumstance upset his calculations, before he had even left the
staircase. When he reached the landlady’s kitchen, the door of which was open
as usual, he glanced cautiously in to see whether, in Nastasya’s absence, the
landlady herself was there, or if not, whether the door to her own room was
closed, so that she might not peep out when he went in for the axe. But what was
his amazement when he suddenly saw that Nastasya was not only at home in the
kitchen, but was occupied there, taking linen out of a basket and hanging it on a
line. Seeing him, she left off hanging the clothes, turned to him and stared at him
all the time he was passing. He turned away his eyes, and walked past as though
he noticed nothing. But it was the end of everything; he had not the axe! He was
overwhelmed.
“What made me think,” he reflected, as he went under the gateway, “what
made me think that she would be sure not to be at home at that moment! Why,
why, why did I assume this so certainly?”
He was crushed and even humiliated. He could have laughed at himself in his
anger.... A dull animal rage boiled within him.
He stood hesitating in the gateway. To go into the street, to go a walk for
appearance’ sake was revolting; to go back to his room, even more revolting.
“And what a chance I have lost for ever!” he muttered, standing aimlessly in the
gateway, just opposite the porter’s little dark room, which was also open.
Suddenly he started. From the porter’s room, two paces away from him,
something shining under the bench to the right caught his eye.... He looked about
him—nobody. He approached the room on tiptoe, went down two steps into it
and in a faint voice called the porter. “Yes, not at home! Somewhere near
though, in the yard, for the door is wide open.” He dashed to the axe (it was an
axe) and pulled it out from under the bench, where it lay between two chunks of
wood; at once, before going out, he made it fast in the noose, he thrust both
hands into his pockets and went out of the room; no one had noticed him!
“When reason fails, the devil helps!” he thought with a strange grin. This chance
raised his spirits extraordinarily.
 
