Pyotr Petrovitch had had occasion that morning to realise some five-per-cent
bonds and now he sat down to the table and counted over bundles of notes.
Andrey Semyonovitch who hardly ever had any money walked about the room
pretending to himself to look at all those bank notes with indifference and even
contempt. Nothing would have convinced Pyotr Petrovitch that Andrey
Semyonovitch could really look on the money unmoved, and the latter, on his
side, kept thinking bitterly that Pyotr Petrovitch was capable of entertaining such
an idea about him and was, perhaps, glad of the opportunity of teasing his young
friend by reminding him of his inferiority and the great difference between them.
He found him incredibly inattentive and irritable, though he, Andrey
Semyonovitch, began enlarging on his favourite subject, the foundation of a new
special “commune.” The brief remarks that dropped from Pyotr Petrovitch
between the clicking of the beads on the reckoning frame betrayed unmistakable
and discourteous irony. But the “humane” Andrey Semyonovitch ascribed Pyotr
Petrovitch’s ill-humour to his recent breach with Dounia and he was burning
with impatience to discourse on that theme. He had something progressive to say
on the subject which might console his worthy friend and “could not fail” to
promote his development.
“There is some sort of festivity being prepared at that... at the widow’s, isn’t
there?” Pyotr Petrovitch asked suddenly, interrupting Andrey Semyonovitch at
the most interesting passage.
“Why, don’t you know? Why, I was telling you last night what I think about
all such ceremonies. And she invited you too, I heard. You were talking to her
yesterday...”
“I should never have expected that beggarly fool would have spent on this
feast all the money she got from that other fool, Raskolnikov. I was surprised
just now as I came through at the preparations there, the wines! Several people
are invited. It’s beyond everything!” continued Pyotr Petrovitch, who seemed to
have some object in pursuing the conversation. “What? You say I am asked too?
When was that? I don’t remember. But I shan’t go. Why should I? I only said a
word to her in passing yesterday of the possibility of her obtaining a year’s
salary as a destitute widow of a government clerk. I suppose she has invited me
on that account, hasn’t she? He-he-he!”