“Can this be still a dream?” Raskolnikov thought once more.
He looked carefully and suspiciously at the unexpected visitor.
“Svidrigaïlov! What nonsense! It can’t be!” he said at last aloud in
bewilderment.
His visitor did not seem at all surprised at this exclamation.
“I’ve come to you for two reasons. In the first place, I wanted to make your
personal acquaintance, as I have already heard a great deal about you that is
interesting and flattering; secondly, I cherish the hope that you may not refuse to
assist me in a matter directly concerning the welfare of your sister, Avdotya
Romanovna. For without your support she might not let me come near her now,
for she is prejudiced against me, but with your assistance I reckon on...”
“You reckon wrongly,” interrupted Raskolnikov.
“They only arrived yesterday, may I ask you?”
Raskolnikov made no reply.
“It was yesterday, I know. I only arrived myself the day before. Well, let me
tell you this, Rodion Romanovitch, I don’t consider it necessary to justify
myself, but kindly tell me what was there particularly criminal on my part in all
this business, speaking without prejudice, with common sense?”
Raskolnikov continued to look at him in silence.
“That in my own house I persecuted a defenceless girl and ‘insulted her with
my infamous proposals’—is that it? (I am anticipating you.) But you’ve only to
assume that I, too, am a man et nihil humanum... in a word, that I am capable of
being attracted and falling in love (which does not depend on our will), then
everything can be explained in the most natural manner. The question is, am I a
monster, or am I myself a victim? And what if I am a victim? In proposing to the
object of my passion to elope with me to America or Switzerland, I may have
cherished the deepest respect for her and may have thought that I was promoting
our mutual happiness! Reason is the slave of passion, you know; why, probably,
I was doing more harm to myself than anyone!”
“But that’s not the point,” Raskolnikov interrupted with disgust. “It’s simply
that whether you are right or wrong, we dislike you. We don’t want to have
anything to do with you. We show you the door. Go out!” 
