“Have I got to bother myself about you, too, now?” said Raskolnikov
suddenly, coming with nervous impatience straight to the point. “Even though
perhaps you are the most dangerous man if you care to injure me, I don’t want to
put myself out any more. I will show you at once that I don’t prize myself as you
probably think I do. I’ve come to tell you at once that if you keep to your former
intentions with regard to my sister and if you think to derive any benefit in that
direction from what has been discovered of late, I will kill you before you get me
locked up. You can reckon on my word. You know that I can keep it. And in the
second place if you want to tell me anything—for I keep fancying all this time
that you have something to tell me—make haste and tell it, for time is precious
and very likely it will soon be too late.”
“Why in such haste?” asked Svidrigaïlov, looking at him curiously.
“Everyone has his plans,” Raskolnikov answered gloomily and impatiently.
“You urged me yourself to frankness just now, and at the first question you
refuse to answer,” Svidrigaïlov observed with a smile. “You keep fancying that I
have aims of my own and so you look at me with suspicion. Of course it’s
perfectly natural in your position. But though I should like to be friends with
you, I shan’t trouble myself to convince you of the contrary. The game isn’t
worth the candle and I wasn’t intending to talk to you about anything special.”
“What did you want me, for, then? It was you who came hanging about me.”
“Why, simply as an interesting subject for observation. I liked the fantastic
nature of your position—that’s what it was! Besides you are the brother of a
person who greatly interested me, and from that person I had in the past heard a
very great deal about you, from which I gathered that you had a great influence
over her; isn’t that enough? Ha-ha-ha! Still I must admit that your question is
rather complex, and is difficult for me to answer. Here, you, for instance, have
come to me not only for a definite object, but for the sake of hearing something
new. Isn’t that so? Isn’t that so?” persisted Svidrigaïlov with a sly smile. “Well,
can’t you fancy then that I, too, on my way here in the train was reckoning on
you, on your telling me something new, and on my making some profit out of
you! You see what rich men we are!”
“What profit could you make?”
“How can I tell you? How do I know? You see in what a tavern I spend all my
time and it’s my enjoyment, that’s to say it’s no great enjoyment, but one must
sit somewhere; that poor Katia now—you saw her?... If only I had been a glutton
now, a club gourmand, but you see I can eat this.”