“A woman drowning! A woman drowning!” shouted dozens of voices; people
ran up, both banks were thronged with spectators, on the bridge people crowded
about Raskolnikov, pressing up behind him.
“Mercy on it! it’s our Afrosinya!” a woman cried tearfully close by. “Mercy!
save her! kind people, pull her out!”
“A boat, a boat” was shouted in the crowd. But there was no need of a boat; a
policeman ran down the steps to the canal, threw off his great coat and his boots
and rushed into the water. It was easy to reach her: she floated within a couple of
yards from the steps, he caught hold of her clothes with his right hand and with
his left seized a pole which a comrade held out to him; the drowning woman was
pulled out at once. They laid her on the granite pavement of the embankment.
She soon recovered consciousness, raised her head, sat up and began sneezing
and coughing, stupidly wiping her wet dress with her hands. She said nothing.
“She’s drunk herself out of her senses,” the same woman’s voice wailed at her
side. “Out of her senses. The other day she tried to hang herself, we cut her
down. I ran out to the shop just now, left my little girl to look after her—and here
she’s in trouble again! A neighbour, gentleman, a neighbour, we live close by,
the second house from the end, see yonder....”
The crowd broke up. The police still remained round the woman, someone
mentioned the police station.... Raskolnikov looked on with a strange sensation
of indifference and apathy. He felt disgusted. “No, that’s loathsome... water... it’s
not good enough,” he muttered to himself. “Nothing will come of it,” he added,
“no use to wait. What about the police office...? And why isn’t Zametov at the
police office? The police office is open till ten o’clock....” He turned his back to
the railing and looked about him.
“Very well then!” he said resolutely; he moved from the bridge and walked in
the direction of the police office. His heart felt hollow and empty. He did not
want to think. Even his depression had passed, there was not a trace now of the
energy with which he had set out “to make an end of it all.” Complete apathy
had succeeded to it. 
