“Your request that my brother should not be present at our meeting was
disregarded solely at my insistance,” said Dounia. “You wrote that you had been
insulted by my brother; I think that this must be explained at once, and you must
be reconciled. And if Rodya really has insulted you, then he should and will
apologise.”
Pyotr Petrovitch took a stronger line.
“There are insults, Avdotya Romanovna, which no goodwill can make us
forget. There is a line in everything which it is dangerous to overstep; and when
it has been overstepped, there is no return.”
“That wasn’t what I was speaking of exactly, Pyotr Petrovitch,” Dounia
interrupted with some impatience. “Please understand that our whole future
depends now on whether all this is explained and set right as soon as possible. I
tell you frankly at the start that I cannot look at it in any other light, and if you
have the least regard for me, all this business must be ended to-day, however
hard that may be. I repeat that if my brother is to blame he will ask your
forgiveness.”
“I am surprised at your putting the question like that,” said Luzhin, getting
more and more irritated. “Esteeming, and so to say, adoring you, I may at the
same time, very well indeed, be able to dislike some member of your family.
Though I lay claim to the happiness of your hand, I cannot accept duties
incompatible with...”
“Ah, don’t be so ready to take offence, Pyotr Petrovitch,” Dounia interrupted
with feeling, “and be the sensible and generous man I have always considered,
and wish to consider, you to be. I’ve given you a great promise, I am your
betrothed. Trust me in this matter and, believe me, I shall be capable of judging
impartially. My assuming the part of judge is as much a surprise for my brother
as for you. When I insisted on his coming to our interview to-day after your
letter, I told him nothing of what I meant to do. Understand that, if you are not
reconciled, I must choose between you—it must be either you or he. That is how
the question rests on your side and on his. I don’t want to be mistaken in my
choice, and I must not be. For your sake I must break off with my brother, for
my brother’s sake I must break off with you. I can find out for certain now
whether he is a brother to me, and I want to know it; and of you, whether I am
dear to you, whether you esteem me, whether you are the husband for me.” 
