So he lay a very long while. Now and then he seemed to wake up, and at such
moments he noticed that it was far into the night, but it did not occur to him to
get up. At last he noticed that it was beginning to get light. He was lying on his
back, still dazed from his recent oblivion. Fearful, despairing cries rose shrilly
from the street, sounds which he heard every night, indeed, under his window
after two o’clock. They woke him up now.
“Ah! the drunken men are coming out of the taverns,” he thought, “it’s past
two o’clock,” and at once he leaped up, as though someone had pulled him from
the sofa.
“What! Past two o’clock!”
He sat down on the sofa—and instantly recollected everything! All at once, in
one flash, he recollected everything.
For the first moment he thought he was going mad. A dreadful chill came over
him; but the chill was from the fever that had begun long before in his sleep.
Now he was suddenly taken with violent shivering, so that his teeth chattered
and all his limbs were shaking. He opened the door and began listening—
everything in the house was asleep. With amazement he gazed at himself and
everything in the room around him, wondering how he could have come in the
night before without fastening the door, and have flung himself on the sofa
without undressing, without even taking his hat off. It had fallen off and was
lying on the floor near his pillow.
“If anyone had come in, what would he have thought? That I’m drunk but...”
He rushed to the window. There was light enough, and he began hurriedly
looking himself all over from head to foot, all his clothes; were there no traces?
But there was no doing it like that; shivering with cold, he began taking off
everything and looking over again. He turned everything over to the last threads
and rags, and mistrusting himself, went through his search three times.
But there seemed to be nothing, no trace, except in one place, where some
thick drops of congealed blood were clinging to the frayed edge of his trousers.
He picked up a big claspknife and cut off the frayed threads. There seemed to be
nothing more.
 
