“Hm!” said the latter, “he has forgotten. I fancied then that you were not quite
yourself. Now you are better for your sleep.... You really look much better. Firstrate! Well, to business. Look here, my dear boy.”
He began untying the bundle, which evidently interested him.
“Believe me, brother, this is something specially near my heart. For we must
make a man of you. Let’s begin from the top. Do you see this cap?” he said,
taking out of the bundle a fairly good though cheap and ordinary cap. “Let me
try it on.”
“Presently, afterwards,” said Raskolnikov, waving it off pettishly.
“Come, Rodya, my boy, don’t oppose it, afterwards will be too late; and I
shan’t sleep all night, for I bought it by guess, without measure. Just right!” he
cried triumphantly, fitting it on, “just your size! A proper head-covering is the
first thing in dress and a recommendation in its own way. Tolstyakov, a friend of
mine, is always obliged to take off his pudding basin when he goes into any
public place where other people wear their hats or caps. People think he does it
from slavish politeness, but it’s simply because he is ashamed of his bird’s nest;
he is such a boastful fellow! Look, Nastasya, here are two specimens of
headgear: this Palmerston”—he took from the corner Raskolnikov’s old, battered
hat, which for some unknown reason, he called a Palmerston—“or this jewel!
Guess the price, Rodya, what do you suppose I paid for it, Nastasya!” he said,
turning to her, seeing that Raskolnikov did not speak.
“Twenty copecks, no more, I dare say,” answered Nastasya.
“Twenty copecks, silly!” he cried, offended. “Why, nowadays you would cost
more than that—eighty copecks! And that only because it has been worn. And
it’s bought on condition that when’s it’s worn out, they will give you another
next year. Yes, on my word! Well, now let us pass to the United States of
America, as they called them at school. I assure you I am proud of these
breeches,” and he exhibited to Raskolnikov a pair of light, summer trousers of
grey woollen material. “No holes, no spots, and quite respectable, although a
little worn; and a waistcoat to match, quite in the fashion. And its being worn
really is an improvement, it’s softer, smoother.... You see, Rodya, to my thinking,
the great thing for getting on in the world is always to keep to the seasons; if you
don’t insist on having asparagus in January, you keep your money in your purse;
and it’s the same with this purchase. It’s summer now, so I’ve been buying
summer things—warmer materials will be wanted for autumn, so you will have
to throw these away in any case... especially as they will be done for by then
from their own lack of coherence if not your higher standard of luxury. Come,
price them! What do you say? Two roubles twenty-five copecks! And remember
the condition: if you wear these out, you will have another suit for nothing! They
only do business on that system at Fedyaev’s; if you’ve bought a thing once, you
are satisfied for life, for you will never go there again of your own free will.
Now for the boots. What do you say? You see that they are a bit worn, but they’ll
last a couple of months, for it’s foreign work and foreign leather; the secretary of
the English Embassy sold them last week—he had only worn them six days, but
he was very short of cash. Price—a rouble and a half. A bargain?”
 
