Katerina Ivanovna, hardly knowing what she was doing, sank on her knees
before him.
“A pack of nonsense!” yelled Luzhin, roused to fury, “it’s all nonsense you’ve
been talking! ‘An idea struck you, you didn’t think, you noticed’—what does it
amount to? So I gave it to her on the sly on purpose? What for? With what
object? What have I to do with this...?”
“What for? That’s what I can’t understand, but that what I am telling you is
the fact, that’s certain! So far from my being mistaken, you infamous criminal
man, I remember how, on account of it, a question occurred to me at once, just
when I was thanking you and pressing your hand. What made you put it secretly
in her pocket? Why you did it secretly, I mean? Could it be simply to conceal it
from me, knowing that my convictions are opposed to yours and that I do not
approve of private benevolence, which effects no radical cure? Well, I decided
that you really were ashamed of giving such a large sum before me. Perhaps, too,
I thought, he wants to give her a surprise, when she finds a whole hundredrouble
note in her pocket. (For I know, some benevolent people are very fond of
decking out their charitable actions in that way.) Then the idea struck me, too,
that you wanted to test her, to see whether, when she found it, she would come to
thank you. Then, too, that you wanted to avoid thanks and that, as the saying is,
your right hand should not know... something of that sort, in fact. I thought of so
many possibilities that I put off considering it, but still thought it indelicate to
show you that I knew your secret. But another idea struck me again that Sofya
Semyonovna might easily lose the money before she noticed it, that was why I
decided to come in here to call her out of the room and to tell her that you put a
hundred roubles in her pocket. But on my way I went first to Madame
Kobilatnikov’s to take them the ‘General Treatise on the Positive Method’ and
especially to recommend Piderit’s article (and also Wagner’s); then I come on
here and what a state of things I find! Now could I, could I, have all these ideas
and reflections if I had not seen you put the hundred-rouble note in her pocket?”
When Lebeziatnikov finished his long-winded harangue with the logical
deduction at the end, he was quite tired, and the perspiration streamed from his
face. He could not, alas, even express himself correctly in Russian, though he
knew no other language, so that he was quite exhausted, almost emaciated after
this heroic exploit. But his speech produced a powerful effect. He had spoken
with such vehemence, with such conviction that everyone obviously believed
him. Pyotr Petrovitch felt that things were going badly with him.