“Ah, he’s eating, then he’s not ill,” said Razumihin. He took a chair and sat
down at the table opposite Raskolnikov.
He was troubled and did not attempt to conceal it. He spoke with evident
annoyance, but without hurry or raising his voice. He looked as though he had
some special fixed determination.
“Listen,” he began resolutely. “As far as I am concerned, you may all go to
hell, but from what I see, it’s clear to me that I can’t make head or tail of it;
please don’t think I’ve come to ask you questions. I don’t want to know, hang it!
If you begin telling me your secrets, I dare say I shouldn’t stay to listen, I should
go away cursing. I have only come to find out once for all whether it’s a fact that
you are mad? There is a conviction in the air that you are mad or very nearly so.
I admit I’ve been disposed to that opinion myself, judging from your stupid,
repulsive and quite inexplicable actions, and from your recent behavior to your
mother and sister. Only a monster or a madman could treat them as you have; so
you must be mad.”
“When did you see them last?”
“Just now. Haven’t you seen them since then? What have you been doing with
yourself? Tell me, please. I’ve been to you three times already. Your mother has
been seriously ill since yesterday. She had made up her mind to come to you;
Avdotya Romanovna tried to prevent her; she wouldn’t hear a word. ‘If he is ill,
if his mind is giving way, who can look after him like his mother?’ she said. We
all came here together, we couldn’t let her come alone all the way. We kept
begging her to be calm. We came in, you weren’t here; she sat down, and stayed
ten minutes, while we stood waiting in silence. She got up and said: ‘If he’s gone
out, that is, if he is well, and has forgotten his mother, it’s humiliating and
unseemly for his mother to stand at his door begging for kindness.’ She returned
home and took to her bed; now she is in a fever. ‘I see,’ she said, ‘that he has
time for his girl.’ She means by your girl Sofya Semyonovna, your betrothed or
your mistress, I don’t know. I went at once to Sofya Semyonovna’s, for I wanted
to know what was going on. I looked round, I saw the coffin, the children crying,
and Sofya Semyonovna trying them on mourning dresses. No sign of you. I
apologised, came away, and reported to Avdotya Romanovna. So that’s all
nonsense and you haven’t got a girl; the most likely thing is that you are mad.
But here you sit, guzzling boiled beef as though you’d not had a bite for three
days. Though as far as that goes, madmen eat too, but though you have not said a
word to me yet... you are not mad! That I’d swear! Above all, you are not mad!
So you may go to hell, all of you, for there’s some mystery, some secret about it,
and I don’t intend to worry my brains over your secrets. So I’ve simply come to
swear at you,” he finished, getting up, “to relieve my mind. And I know what to
do now.”