“Well,... mother I don’t wonder at, it’s like her, God bless her, but how could
Dounia? Dounia darling, as though I did not know you! You were nearly twenty
when I saw you last: I understood you then. Mother writes that ‘Dounia can put
up with a great deal.’ I know that very well. I knew that two years and a half ago,
and for the last two and a half years I have been thinking about it, thinking of
just that, that ‘Dounia can put up with a great deal.’ If she could put up with Mr.
Svidrigaïlov and all the rest of it, she certainly can put up with a great deal. And
now mother and she have taken it into their heads that she can put up with Mr.
Luzhin, who propounds the theory of the superiority of wives raised from
destitution and owing everything to their husband’s bounty—who propounds it,
too, almost at the first interview. Granted that he ‘let it slip,’ though he is a
sensible man, (yet maybe it was not a slip at all, but he meant to make himself
clear as soon as possible) but Dounia, Dounia? She understands the man, of
course, but she will have to live with the man. Why! she’d live on black bread
and water, she would not sell her soul, she would not barter her moral freedom
for comfort; she would not barter it for all Schleswig-Holstein, much less Mr.
Luzhin’s money. No, Dounia was not that sort when I knew her and... she is still
the same, of course! Yes, there’s no denying, the Svidrigaïlovs are a bitter pill!
It’s a bitter thing to spend one’s life a governess in the provinces for two hundred
roubles, but I know she would rather be a nigger on a plantation or a Lett with a
German master than degrade her soul, and her moral dignity, by binding herself
for ever to a man whom she does not respect and with whom she has nothing in
common—for her own advantage. And if Mr. Luzhin had been of unalloyed
gold, or one huge diamond, she would never have consented to become his legal
concubine. Why is she consenting then? What’s the point of it? What’s the
answer? It’s clear enough: for herself, for her comfort, to save her life she would
not sell herself, but for someone else she is doing it! For one she loves, for one
she adores, she will sell herself! That’s what it all amounts to; for her brother, for
her mother, she will sell herself! She will sell everything! In such cases, ‘we
overcome our moral feeling if necessary,’ freedom, peace, conscience even, all,
all are brought into the market. Let my life go, if only my dear ones may be
happy! More than that, we become casuists, we learn to be Jesuitical and for a
time maybe we can soothe ourselves, we can persuade ourselves that it is one’s
duty for a good object. That’s just like us, it’s as clear as daylight. It’s clear that
Rodion Romanovitch Raskolnikov is the central figure in the business, and no
one else. Oh, yes, she can ensure his happiness, keep him in the university, make
him a partner in the office, make his whole future secure; perhaps he may even
be a rich man later on, prosperous, respected, and may even end his life a famous
man! But my mother? It’s all Rodya, precious Rodya, her first born! For such a
son who would not sacrifice such a daughter! Oh, loving, over-partial hearts!
Why, for his sake we would not shrink even from Sonia’s fate. Sonia, Sonia
Marmeladov, the eternal victim so long as the world lasts. Have you taken the
measure of your sacrifice, both of you? Is it right? Can you bear it? Is it any use?
Is there sense in it? And let me tell you, Dounia, Sonia’s life is no worse than life
with Mr. Luzhin. ‘There can be no question of love,’ mother writes. And what if
there can be no respect either, if on the contrary there is aversion, contempt,
repulsion, what then? So you will have to ‘keep up your appearance,’ too. Is not
that so? Do you understand what that smartness means? Do you understand that
the Luzhin smartness is just the same thing as Sonia’s and may be worse, viler,
baser, because in your case, Dounia, it’s a bargain for luxuries, after all, but with
Sonia it’s simply a question of starvation. It has to be paid for, it has to be paid
for, Dounia, this smartness. And what if it’s more than you can bear afterwards,
if you regret it? The bitterness, the misery, the curses, the tears hidden from all
the world, for you are not a Marfa Petrovna. And how will your mother feel
then? Even now she is uneasy, she is worried, but then, when she sees it all
clearly? And I? Yes, indeed, what have you taken me for? I won’t have your
sacrifice, Dounia, I won’t have it, mother! It shall not be, so long as I am alive, it
shall not, it shall not! I won’t accept it!”
 
