They came out into the street.
“Do you know, Dounia, when I dozed a little this morning I dreamed of Marfa
Petrovna... she was all in white... she came up to me, took my hand, and shook
her head at me, but so sternly as though she were blaming me.... Is that a good
omen? Oh, dear me! You don’t know, Dmitri Prokofitch, that Marfa Petrovna’s
dead!”
“No, I didn’t know; who is Marfa Petrovna?”
“She died suddenly; and only fancy...”
“Afterwards, mamma,” put in Dounia. “He doesn’t know who Marfa Petrovna
is.”
“Ah, you don’t know? And I was thinking that you knew all about us. Forgive
me, Dmitri Prokofitch, I don’t know what I am thinking about these last few
days. I look upon you really as a providence for us, and so I took it for granted
that you knew all about us. I look on you as a relation.... Don’t be angry with me
for saying so. Dear me, what’s the matter with your right hand? Have you
knocked it?”
“Yes, I bruised it,” muttered Razumihin overjoyed.
“I sometimes speak too much from the heart, so that Dounia finds fault with
me.... But, dear me, what a cupboard he lives in! I wonder whether he is awake?
Does this woman, his landlady, consider it a room? Listen, you say he does not
like to show his feelings, so perhaps I shall annoy him with my... weaknesses?
Do advise me, Dmitri Prokofitch, how am I to treat him? I feel quite distracted,
you know.”
“Don’t question him too much about anything if you see him frown; don’t ask
him too much about his health; he doesn’t like that.”
“Ah, Dmitri Prokofitch, how hard it is to be a mother! But here are the
stairs.... What an awful staircase!”
“Mother, you are quite pale, don’t distress yourself, darling,” said Dounia
caressing her, then with flashing eyes she added: “He ought to be happy at
seeing you, and you are tormenting yourself so.”
“Wait, I’ll peep in and see whether he has waked up.”
The ladies slowly followed Razumihin, who went on before, and when they
reached the landlady’s door on the fourth storey, they noticed that her door was a
tiny crack open and that two keen black eyes were watching them from the
darkness within. When their eyes met, the door was suddenly shut with such a
slam that Pulcheria Alexandrovna almost cried out. 
