But no sooner did he touch the clothes than a gold watch slipped from under
the fur coat. He made haste to turn them all over. There turned out to be various
articles made of gold among the clothes—probably all pledges, unredeemed or
waiting to be redeemed—bracelets, chains, ear-rings, pins and such things. Some
were in cases, others simply wrapped in newspaper, carefully and exactly folded,
and tied round with tape. Without any delay, he began filling up the pockets of
his trousers and overcoat without examining or undoing the parcels and cases;
but he had not time to take many....
He suddenly heard steps in the room where the old woman lay. He stopped
short and was still as death. But all was quiet, so it must have been his fancy. All
at once he heard distinctly a faint cry, as though someone had uttered a low
broken moan. Then again dead silence for a minute or two. He sat squatting on
his heels by the box and waited holding his breath. Suddenly he jumped up,
seized the axe and ran out of the bedroom.
In the middle of the room stood Lizaveta with a big bundle in her arms. She
was gazing in stupefaction at her murdered sister, white as a sheet and seeming
not to have the strength to cry out. Seeing him run out of the bedroom, she began
faintly quivering all over, like a leaf, a shudder ran down her face; she lifted her
hand, opened her mouth, but still did not scream. She began slowly backing
away from him into the corner, staring intently, persistently at him, but still
uttered no sound, as though she could not get breath to scream. He rushed at her
with the axe; her mouth twitched piteously, as one sees babies’ mouths, when
they begin to be frightened, stare intently at what frightens them and are on the
point of screaming. And this hapless Lizaveta was so simple and had been so
thoroughly crushed and scared that she did not even raise a hand to guard her
face, though that was the most necessary and natural action at the moment, for
the axe was raised over her face. She only put up her empty left hand, but not to
her face, slowly holding it out before her as though motioning him away. The
axe fell with the sharp edge just on the skull and split at one blow all the top of
the head. She fell heavily at once. Raskolnikov completely lost his head,
snatching up her bundle, dropped it again and ran into the entry 
