Later on Raskolnikov happened to find out why the huckster and his wife had
invited Lizaveta. It was a very ordinary matter and there was nothing exceptional
about it. A family who had come to the town and been reduced to poverty were
selling their household goods and clothes, all women’s things. As the things
would have fetched little in the market, they were looking for a dealer. This was
Lizaveta’s business. She undertook such jobs and was frequently employed, as
she was very honest and always fixed a fair price and stuck to it. She spoke as a
rule little and, as we have said already, she was very submissive and timid.
But Raskolnikov had become superstitious of late. The traces of superstition
remained in him long after, and were almost ineradicable. And in all this he was
always afterwards disposed to see something strange and mysterious, as it were,
the presence of some peculiar influences and coincidences. In the previous
winter a student he knew called Pokorev, who had left for Harkov, had chanced
in conversation to give him the address of Alyona Ivanovna, the old pawnbroker,
in case he might want to pawn anything. For a long while he did not go to her,
for he had lessons and managed to get along somehow. Six weeks ago he had
remembered the address; he had two articles that could be pawned: his father’s
old silver watch and a little gold ring with three red stones, a present from his
sister at parting. He decided to take the ring. When he found the old woman he
had felt an insurmountable repulsion for her at the first glance, though he knew
nothing special about her. He got two roubles from her and went into a miserable
little tavern on his way home. He asked for tea, sat down and sank into deep
thought. A strange idea was pecking at his brain like a chicken in the egg, and
very, very much absorbed him.
Almost beside him at the next table there was sitting a student, whom he did
not know and had never seen, and with him a young officer. They had played a
game of billiards and began drinking tea. All at once he heard the student
mention to the officer the pawnbroker Alyona Ivanovna and give him her
address. This of itself seemed strange to Raskolnikov; he had just come from her
and here at once he heard her name. Of course it was a chance, but he could not
shake off a very extraordinary impression, and here someone seemed to be
speaking expressly for him; the student began telling his friend various details
about Alyona Ivanovna.
