“Yes, now! What’s to be done now?... Together, together!” she repeated as it
were unconsciously, and she hugged him again. “I’ll follow you to Siberia!”
He recoiled at this, and the same hostile, almost haughty smile came to his
lips.
“Perhaps I don’t want to go to Siberia yet, Sonia,” he said.
Sonia looked at him quickly.
Again after her first passionate, agonising sympathy for the unhappy man the
terrible idea of the murder overwhelmed her. In his changed tone she seemed to
hear the murderer speaking. She looked at him bewildered. She knew nothing as
yet, why, how, with what object it had been. Now all these questions rushed at
once into her mind. And again she could not believe it: “He, he is a murderer!
Could it be true?”
“What’s the meaning of it? Where am I?” she said in complete bewilderment,
as though still unable to recover herself. “How could you, you, a man like you....
How could you bring yourself to it?... What does it mean?”
“Oh, well—to plunder. Leave off, Sonia,” he answered wearily, almost with
vexation.
Sonia stood as though struck dumb, but suddenly she cried:
“You were hungry! It was... to help your mother? Yes?”
“No, Sonia, no,” he muttered, turning away and hanging his head. “I was not
so hungry.... I certainly did want to help my mother, but... that’s not the real
thing either.... Don’t torture me, Sonia.”
Sonia clasped her hands.
“Could it, could it all be true? Good God, what a truth! Who could believe it?
And how could you give away your last farthing and yet rob and murder! Ah,”
she cried suddenly, “that money you gave Katerina Ivanovna... that money....
Can that money...”
“No, Sonia,” he broke in hurriedly, “that money was not it. Don’t worry
yourself! That money my mother sent me and it came when I was ill, the day I
gave it to you.... Razumihin saw it... he received it for me.... That money was
mine—my own.”
Sonia listened to him in bewilderment and did her utmost to comprehend.
“And that money.... I don’t even know really whether there was any money,”
he added softly, as though reflecting. “I took a purse off her neck, made of
chamois leather... a purse stuffed full of something... but I didn’t look in it; I
suppose I hadn’t time.... And the things—chains and trinkets—I buried under a
stone with the purse next morning in a yard off the V—— Prospect. They are all
there now....”