“But I say, Razumihin, I wonder at you. What a busybody you are!” Zossimov
observed.
“Maybe I am, but we will get him off anyway,” shouted Razumihin, bringing
his fist down on the table. “What’s the most offensive is not their lying—one can
always forgive lying—lying is a delightful thing, for it leads to truth—what is
offensive is that they lie and worship their own lying.... I respect Porfiry, but...
What threw them out at first? The door was locked, and when they came back
with the porter it was open. So it followed that Koch and Pestryakov were the
murderers—that was their logic!”
“But don’t excite yourself; they simply detained them, they could not help
that.... And, by the way, I’ve met that man Koch. He used to buy unredeemed
pledges from the old woman? Eh?”
“Yes, he is a swindler. He buys up bad debts, too. He makes a profession of it.
But enough of him! Do you know what makes me angry? It’s their sickening
rotten, petrified routine.... And this case might be the means of introducing a
new method. One can show from the psychological data alone how to get on the
track of the real man. ‘We have facts,’ they say. But facts are not everything—at
least half the business lies in how you interpret them!”
“Can you interpret them, then?”
“Anyway, one can’t hold one’s tongue when one has a feeling, a tangible
feeling, that one might be a help if only.... Eh! Do you know the details of the
case?”
“I am waiting to hear about the painter.”
“Oh, yes! Well, here’s the story. Early on the third day after the murder, when
they were still dandling Koch and Pestryakov—though they accounted for every
step they took and it was as plain as a pikestaff—an unexpected fact turned up. A
peasant called Dushkin, who keeps a dram-shop facing the house, brought to the
police office a jeweller’s case containing some gold ear-rings, and told a long
rigamarole. ‘The day before yesterday, just after eight o’clock’—mark the day
and the hour!—‘a journeyman house-painter, Nikolay, who had been in to see
me already that day, brought me this box of gold ear-rings and stones, and asked
me to give him two roubles for them. When I asked him where he got them, he
said that he picked them up in the street. I did not ask him anything more.’ I am
telling you Dushkin’s story. ‘I gave him a note’—a rouble that is—‘for I thought
if he did not pawn it with me he would with another. It would all come to the
same thing—he’d spend it on drink, so the thing had better be with me. The
further you hide it the quicker you will find it, and if anything turns up, if I hear
any rumours, I’ll take it to the police.’ Of course, that’s all taradiddle; 
