“Now I can explain it all to myself,” said Raskolnikov, addressing
Lebeziatnikov. “From the very beginning of the business, I suspected that there
was some scoundrelly intrigue at the bottom of it. I began to suspect it from
some special circumstances known to me only, which I will explain at once to
everyone: they account for everything. Your valuable evidence has finally made
everything clear to me. I beg all, all to listen. This gentleman (he pointed to
Luzhin) was recently engaged to be married to a young lady—my sister,
Avdotya Romanovna Raskolnikov. But coming to Petersburg he quarrelled with
me, the day before yesterday, at our first meeting and I drove him out of my
room—I have two witnesses to prove it. He is a very spiteful man.... The day
before yesterday I did not know that he was staying here, in your room, and that
consequently on the very day we quarrelled—the day before yesterday—he saw
me give Katerina Ivanovna some money for the funeral, as a friend of the late
Mr. Marmeladov. He at once wrote a note to my mother and informed her that I
had given away all my money, not to Katerina Ivanovna but to Sofya
Semyonovna, and referred in a most contemptible way to the... character of
Sofya Semyonovna, that is, hinted at the character of my attitude to Sofya
Semyonovna. All this you understand was with the object of dividing me from
my mother and sister, by insinuating that I was squandering on unworthy objects
the money which they had sent me and which was all they had. Yesterday
evening, before my mother and sister and in his presence, I declared that I had
given the money to Katerina Ivanovna for the funeral and not to Sofya
Semyonovna and that I had no acquaintance with Sofya Semyonovna and had
never seen her before, indeed. At the same time I added that he, Pyotr Petrovitch
Luzhin, with all his virtues, was not worth Sofya Semyonovna’s little finger,
though he spoke so ill of her. To his question—would I let Sofya Semyonovna sit
down beside my sister, I answered that I had already done so that day. Irritated
that my mother and sister were unwilling to quarrel with me at his insinuations,
he gradually began being unpardonably rude to them. A final rupture took place
and he was turned out of the house. All this happened yesterday evening. Now I
beg your special attention: consider: if he had now succeeded in proving that
Sofya Semyonovna was a thief, he would have shown to my mother and sister
that he was almost right in his suspicions, that he had reason to be angry at my
putting my sister on a level with Sofya Semyonovna, that, in attacking me, he
was protecting and preserving the honour of my sister, his betrothed. In fact he
might even, through all this, have been able to estrange me from my family, and
no doubt he hoped to be restored to favour with them; to say nothing of
revenging himself on me personally, for he has grounds for supposing that the
honour and happiness of Sofya Semyonovna are very precious to me. That was
what he was working for! That’s how I understand it. That’s the whole reason for
it and there can be no other!”