“Yes, you’ve had a little attack! You’ll bring back your illness again, my dear
fellow,” Porfiry Petrovitch cackled with friendly sympathy, though he still
looked rather disconcerted. “Good heavens, you must take more care of
yourself! Dmitri Prokofitch was here, came to see me yesterday—I know, I
know, I’ve a nasty, ironical temper, but what they made of it!... Good heavens,
he came yesterday after you’d been. We dined and he talked and talked away,
and I could only throw up my hands in despair! Did he come from you? But do
sit down, for mercy’s sake, sit down!”
“No, not from me, but I knew he went to you and why he went,” Raskolnikov
answered sharply.
“You knew?”
“I knew. What of it?”
“Why this, Rodion Romanovitch, that I know more than that about you; I
know about everything. I know how you went to take a flat at night when it was
dark and how you rang the bell and asked about the blood, so that the workmen
and the porter did not know what to make of it. Yes, I understand your state of
mind at that time... but you’ll drive yourself mad like that, upon my word! You’ll
lose your head! You’re full of generous indignation at the wrongs you’ve
received, first from destiny, and then from the police officers, and so you rush
from one thing to another to force them to speak out and make an end of it all,
because you are sick of all this suspicion and foolishness. That’s so, isn’t it? I
have guessed how you feel, haven’t I? Only in that way you’ll lose your head
and Razumihin’s, too; he’s too good a man for such a position, you must know
that. You are ill and he is good and your illness is infectious for him... I’ll tell
you about it when you are more yourself.... But do sit down, for goodness’ sake.
Please rest, you look shocking, do sit down.”
Raskolnikov sat down; he no longer shivered, he was hot all over. In
amazement he listened with strained attention to Porfiry Petrovitch who still
seemed frightened as he looked after him with friendly solicitude. But he did not
believe a word he said, though he felt a strange inclination to believe. Porfiry’s
unexpected words about the flat had utterly overwhelmed him. “How can it be,
he knows about the flat then,” he thought suddenly, “and he tells it me himself!”