And as he said this Porfiry Petrovitch screwed up his eyes and winked; a
good-humoured, crafty look passed over his face. The wrinkles on his forehead
were smoothed out, his eyes contracted, his features broadened and he suddenly
went off into a nervous prolonged laugh, shaking all over and looking
Raskolnikov straight in the face. The latter forced himself to laugh, too, but
when Porfiry, seeing that he was laughing, broke into such a guffaw that he
turned almost crimson, Raskolnikov’s repulsion overcame all precaution; he left
off laughing, scowled and stared with hatred at Porfiry, keeping his eyes fixed on
him while his intentionally prolonged laughter lasted. There was lack of
precaution on both sides, however, for Porfiry Petrovitch seemed to be laughing
in his visitor’s face and to be very little disturbed at the annoyance with which
the visitor received it. The latter fact was very significant in Raskolnikov’s eyes:
he saw that Porfiry Petrovitch had not been embarrassed just before either, but
that he, Raskolnikov, had perhaps fallen into a trap; that there must be
something, some motive here unknown to him; that, perhaps, everything was in
readiness and in another moment would break upon him...
He went straight to the point at once, rose from his seat and took his cap.
“Porfiry Petrovitch,” he began resolutely, though with considerable irritation,
“yesterday you expressed a desire that I should come to you for some inquiries”
(he laid special stress on the word “inquiries”). “I have come and if you have
anything to ask me, ask it, and if not, allow me to withdraw. I have no time to
spare.... I have to be at the funeral of that man who was run over, of whom you...
know also,” he added, feeling angry at once at having made this addition and
more irritated at his anger. “I am sick of it all, do you hear? and have long been.
It’s partly what made me ill. In short,” he shouted, feeling that the phrase about
his illness was still more out of place, “in short, kindly examine me or let me go,
at once. And if you must examine me, do so in the proper form! I will not allow
you to do so otherwise, and so meanwhile, good-bye, as we have evidently
nothing to keep us now.”