“Certainly not insult, but protest. I should do it with a good object. I might
indirectly assist the cause of enlightenment and propaganda. It’s a duty of every
man to work for enlightenment and propaganda and the more harshly, perhaps,
the better. I might drop a seed, an idea.... And something might grow up from
that seed. How should I be insulting them? They might be offended at first, but
afterwards they’d see I’d done them a service. You know, Terebyeva (who is in
the community now) was blamed because when she left her family and...
devoted... herself, she wrote to her father and mother that she wouldn’t go on
living conventionally and was entering on a free marriage and it was said that
that was too harsh, that she might have spared them and have written more
kindly. I think that’s all nonsense and there’s no need of softness; on the
contrary, what’s wanted is protest. Varents had been married seven years, she
abandoned her two children, she told her husband straight out in a letter: ‘I have
realised that I cannot be happy with you. I can never forgive you that you have
deceived me by concealing from me that there is another organisation of society
by means of the communities. I have only lately learned it from a great-hearted
man to whom I have given myself and with whom I am establishing a
community. I speak plainly because I consider it dishonest to deceive you. Do as
you think best. Do not hope to get me back, you are too late. I hope you will be
happy.’ That’s how letters like that ought to be written!”
“Is that Terebyeva the one you said had made a third free marriage?”
“No, it’s only the second, really! But what if it were the fourth, what if it were
the fifteenth, that’s all nonsense! And if ever I regretted the death of my father
and mother, it is now, and I sometimes think if my parents were living what a
protest I would have aimed at them! I would have done something on purpose...
I would have shown them! I would have astonished them! I am really sorry there
is no one!”
“To surprise! He-he! Well, be that as you will,” Pyotr Petrovitch interrupted,
“but tell me this; do you know the dead man’s daughter, the delicate-looking
little thing? It’s true what they say about her, isn’t it?”