“It’s all that cuckoo’s fault! You know whom I mean? Her, her!” Katerina
Ivanovna nodded towards the landlady. “Look at her, she’s making round eyes,
she feels that we are talking about her and can’t understand. Pfoo, the owl! Haha!
(Cough-cough-cough.) And what does she put on that cap for? (Coughcough-
cough.) Have you noticed that she wants everyone to consider that she is
patronising me and doing me an honour by being here? I asked her like a
sensible woman to invite people, especially those who knew my late husband,
and look at the set of fools she has brought! The sweeps! Look at that one with
the spotty face. And those wretched Poles, ha-ha-ha! (Cough-cough-cough.) Not
one of them has ever poked his nose in here, I’ve never set eyes on them. What
have they come here for, I ask you? There they sit in a row. Hey, pan!” she cried
suddenly to one of them, “have you tasted the pancakes? Take some more! Have
some beer! Won’t you have some vodka? Look, he’s jumped up and is making
his bows, they must be quite starved, poor things. Never mind, let them eat!
They don’t make a noise, anyway, though I’m really afraid for our landlady’s
silver spoons... Amalia Ivanovna!” she addressed her suddenly, almost aloud, “if
your spoons should happen to be stolen, I won’t be responsible, I warn you! Haha-
ha!” She laughed turning to Raskolnikov, and again nodding towards the
landlady, in high glee at her sally. “She didn’t understand, she didn’t understand
again! Look how she sits with her mouth open! An owl, a real owl! An owl in
new ribbons, ha-ha-ha!”
Here her laugh turned again to an insufferable fit of coughing that lasted five
minutes. Drops of perspiration stood out on her forehead and her handkerchief
was stained with blood. She showed Raskolnikov the blood in silence, and as
soon as she could get her breath began whispering to him again with extreme
animation and a hectic flush on her cheeks.
“Do you know, I gave her the most delicate instructions, so to speak, for
inviting that lady and her daughter, you understand of whom I am speaking? It
needed the utmost delicacy, the greatest nicety, but she has managed things so
that that fool, that conceited baggage, that provincial nonentity, simply because
she is the widow of a major, and has come to try and get a pension and to fray
out her skirts in the government offices, because at fifty she paints her face
(everybody knows it)... a creature like that did not think fit to come, and has not
even answered the invitation, which the most ordinary good manners required! I
can’t understand why Pyotr Petrovitch has not come? But where’s Sonia? Where
has she gone? Ah, there she is at last! what is it, Sonia, where have you been?
It’s odd that even at your father’s funeral you should be so unpunctual. Rodion
Romanovitch, make room for her beside you. That’s your place, Sonia... take
what you like. Have some of the cold entrée with jelly, that’s the best. They’ll
bring the pancakes directly. Have they given the children some? Polenka, have
you got everything? (Cough-cough-cough.) That’s all right. Be a good girl, Lida,
and, Kolya, don’t fidget with your feet; sit like a little gentleman. What are you
saying, Sonia?”