“Yes, yes.... Of course it’s very annoying....” Raskolnikov muttered in reply,
but with such a preoccupied and inattentive air that Dounia gazed at him in
perplexity.
“What else was it I wanted to say?” He went on trying to recollect. “Oh, yes;
mother, and you too, Dounia, please don’t think that I didn’t mean to come and
see you to-day and was waiting for you to come first.”
“What are you saying, Rodya?” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna. She, too, was
surprised.
“Is he answering us as a duty?” Dounia wondered. “Is he being reconciled and
asking forgiveness as though he were performing a rite or repeating a lesson?”
“I’ve only just waked up, and wanted to go to you, but was delayed owing to
my clothes; I forgot yesterday to ask her... Nastasya... to wash out the blood...
I’ve only just dressed.”
“Blood! What blood?” Pulcheria Alexandrovna asked in alarm.
“Oh, nothing—don’t be uneasy. It was when I was wandering about yesterday,
rather delirious, I chanced upon a man who had been run over... a clerk...”
“Delirious? But you remember everything!” Razumihin interrupted.
“That’s true,” Raskolnikov answered with special carefulness. “I remember
everything even to the slightest detail, and yet—why I did that and went there
and said that, I can’t clearly explain now.”
“A familiar phenomenon,” interposed Zossimov, “actions are sometimes
performed in a masterly and most cunning way, while the direction of the actions
is deranged and dependent on various morbid impressions—it’s like a dream.”
“Perhaps it’s a good thing really that he should think me almost a madman,”
thought Raskolnikov.
“Why, people in perfect health act in the same way too,” observed Dounia,
looking uneasily at Zossimov.
“There is some truth in your observation,” the latter replied. “In that sense we
are certainly all not infrequently like madmen, but with the slight difference that
the deranged are somewhat madder, for we must draw a line. A normal man, it is
true, hardly exists. Among dozens—perhaps hundreds of thousands—hardly one
is to be met with.”