Raskolnikov gave back the pen; but instead of getting up and going away, he
put his elbows on the table and pressed his head in his hands. He felt as if a nail
were being driven into his skull. A strange idea suddenly occurred to him, to get
up at once, to go up to Nikodim Fomitch, and tell him everything that had
happened yesterday, and then to go with him to his lodgings and to show him the
things in the hole in the corner. The impulse was so strong that he got up from
his seat to carry it out. “Hadn’t I better think a minute?” flashed through his
mind. “No, better cast off the burden without thinking.” But all at once he stood
still, rooted to the spot. Nikodim Fomitch was talking eagerly with Ilya
Petrovitch, and the words reached him:
“It’s impossible, they’ll both be released. To begin with, the whole story
contradicts itself. Why should they have called the porter, if it had been their
doing? To inform against themselves? Or as a blind? No, that would be too
cunning! Besides, Pestryakov, the student, was seen at the gate by both the
porters and a woman as he went in. He was walking with three friends, who left
him only at the gate, and he asked the porters to direct him, in the presence of
the friends. Now, would he have asked his way if he had been going with such
an object? As for Koch, he spent half an hour at the silversmith’s below, before
he went up to the old woman and he left him at exactly a quarter to eight. Now
just consider...”
“But excuse me, how do you explain this contradiction? They state themselves
that they knocked and the door was locked; yet three minutes later when they
went up with the porter, it turned out the door was unfastened.”
“That’s just it; the murderer must have been there and bolted himself in; and
they’d have caught him for a certainty if Koch had not been an ass and gone to
look for the porter too. He must have seized the interval to get downstairs and
slip by them somehow. Koch keeps crossing himself and saying: ‘If I had been
there, he would have jumped out and killed me with his axe.’ He is going to have
a thanksgiving service—ha, ha!” 
