He stood and gazed and could not believe his eyes: the door, the outer door
from the stairs, at which he had not long before waited and rung, was standing
unfastened and at least six inches open. No lock, no bolt, all the time, all that
time! The old woman had not shut it after him perhaps as a precaution. But,
good God! Why, he had seen Lizaveta afterwards! And how could he, how could
he have failed to reflect that she must have come in somehow! She could not
have come through the wall!
He dashed to the door and fastened the latch.
“But no, the wrong thing again! I must get away, get away....”
He unfastened the latch, opened the door and began listening on the staircase.
He listened a long time. Somewhere far away, it might be in the gateway, two
voices were loudly and shrilly shouting, quarrelling and scolding. “What are
they about?” He waited patiently. At last all was still, as though suddenly cut off;
they had separated. He was meaning to go out, but suddenly, on the floor below,
a door was noisily opened and someone began going downstairs humming a
tune. “How is it they all make such a noise?” flashed through his mind. Once
more he closed the door and waited. At last all was still, not a soul stirring. He
was just taking a step towards the stairs when he heard fresh footsteps.
The steps sounded very far off, at the very bottom of the stairs, but he
remembered quite clearly and distinctly that from the first sound he began for
some reason to suspect that this was someone coming there, to the fourth floor,
to the old woman. Why? Were the sounds somehow peculiar, significant? The
steps were heavy, even and unhurried. Now he had passed the first floor, now he
was mounting higher, it was growing more and more distinct! He could hear his
heavy breathing. And now the third storey had been reached. Coming here! And
it seemed to him all at once that he was turned to stone, that it was like a dream
in which one is being pursued, nearly caught and will be killed, and is rooted to
the spot and cannot even move one’s arms.
At last when the unknown was mounting to the fourth floor, he suddenly
started, and succeeded in slipping neatly and quickly back into the flat and
closing the door behind him. Then he took the hook and softly, noiselessly, fixed
it in the catch. Instinct helped him. When he had done this, he crouched holding
his breath, by the door. The unknown visitor was by now also at the door. They
were now standing opposite one another, as he had just before been standing
with the old woman, when the door divided them and he was listening.
The visitor panted several times. “He must be a big, fat man,” thought
Raskolnikov, squeezing the axe in his hand. It seemed like a dream indeed. The
visitor took hold of the bell and rang it loudly 
