“And do you know your prayers?”
“Of course, we do! We knew them long ago. I say my prayers to myself as I
am a big girl now, but Kolya and Lida say them aloud with mother. First they
repeat the ‘Ave Maria’ and then another prayer: ‘Lord, forgive and bless sister
Sonia,’ and then another, ‘Lord, forgive and bless our second father.’ For our
elder father is dead and this is another one, but we do pray for the other as well.”
“Polenka, my name is Rodion. Pray sometimes for me, too. ‘And Thy servant
Rodion,’ nothing more.”
“I’ll pray for you all the rest of my life,” the little girl declared hotly, and
suddenly smiling again she rushed at him and hugged him warmly once more.
Raskolnikov told her his name and address and promised to be sure to come
next day. The child went away quite enchanted with him. It was past ten when he
came out into the street. In five minutes he was standing on the bridge at the spot
where the woman had jumped in.
“Enough,” he pronounced resolutely and triumphantly. “I’ve done with
fancies, imaginary terrors and phantoms! Life is real! haven’t I lived just now?
My life has not yet died with that old woman! The Kingdom of Heaven to her—
and now enough, madam, leave me in peace! Now for the reign of reason and
light... and of will, and of strength... and now we will see! We will try our
strength!” he added defiantly, as though challenging some power of darkness.
“And I was ready to consent to live in a square of space!
“I am very weak at this moment, but... I believe my illness is all over. I knew
it would be over when I went out. By the way, Potchinkov’s house is only a few
steps away. I certainly must go to Razumihin even if it were not close by... let
him win his bet! Let us give him some satisfaction, too—no matter! Strength,
strength is what one wants, you can get nothing without it, and strength must be
won by strength—that’s what they don’t know,” he added proudly and selfconfidently and he walked with flagging footsteps from the bridge. Pride and
self-confidence grew continually stronger in him; he was becoming a different
man every moment. What was it had happened to work this revolution in him?
He did not know himself; like a man catching at a straw, he suddenly felt that he,
too, ‘could live, that there was still life for him, that his life had not died with the
old woman.’ Perhaps he was in too great a hurry with his conclusions, but he did
not think of that.
“But I did ask her to remember ‘Thy servant Rodion’ in her prayers,” the idea
struck him. “Well, that was... in case of emergency,” he added and laughed
himself at his boyish sally. He was in the best of spirits.
 
