“I don’t intend to go either,” said Lebeziatnikov.
“I should think not, after giving her a thrashing! You might well hesitate, hehe!”
“Who thrashed? Whom?” cried Lebeziatnikov, flustered and blushing.
“Why, you thrashed Katerina Ivanovna a month ago. I heard so yesterday... so
that’s what your convictions amount to... and the woman question, too, wasn’t
quite sound, he-he-he!” and Pyotr Petrovitch, as though comforted, went back to
clicking his beads.
“It’s all slander and nonsense!” cried Lebeziatnikov, who was always afraid of
allusions to the subject. “It was not like that at all, it was quite different. You’ve
heard it wrong; it’s a libel. I was simply defending myself. She rushed at me first
with her nails, she pulled out all my whiskers.... It’s permissable for anyone, I
should hope, to defend himself and I never allow anyone to use violence to me
on principle, for it’s an act of despotism. What was I to do? I simply pushed her
back.”
“He-he-he!” Luzhin went on laughing maliciously.
“You keep on like that because you are out of humour yourself.... But that’s
nonsense and it has nothing, nothing whatever to do with the woman question!
You don’t understand; I used to think, indeed, that if women are equal to men in
all respects, even in strength (as is maintained now) there ought to be equality in
that, too. Of course, I reflected afterwards that such a question ought not really
to arise, for there ought not to be fighting and in the future society fighting is
unthinkable... and that it would be a queer thing to seek for equality in fighting. I
am not so stupid... though, of course, there is fighting... there won’t be later, but
at present there is... confound it! How muddled one gets with you! It’s not on
that account that I am not going. I am not going on principle, not to take part in
the revolting convention of memorial dinners, that’s why! Though, of course,
one might go to laugh at it.... I am sorry there won’t be any priests at it. I should
certainly go if there were.”
“Then you would sit down at another man’s table and insult it and those who
invited you. Eh?”