Raskolnikov got up, and sat down on the sofa. He waved his hand weakly to
Razumihin to cut short the flow of warm and incoherent consolations he was
addressing to his mother and sister, took them both by the hand and for a minute
or two gazed from one to the other without speaking. His mother was alarmed by
his expression. It revealed an emotion agonisingly poignant, and at the same
time something immovable, almost insane. Pulcheria Alexandrovna began to cry.
Avdotya Romanovna was pale; her hand trembled in her brother’s.
“Go home... with him,” he said in a broken voice, pointing to Razumihin,
“good-bye till to-morrow; to-morrow everything... Is it long since you arrived?”
“This evening, Rodya,” answered Pulcheria Alexandrovna, “the train was
awfully late. But, Rodya, nothing would induce me to leave you now! I will
spend the night here, near you...”
“Don’t torture me!” he said with a gesture of irritation.
“I will stay with him,” cried Razumihin, “I won’t leave him for a moment.
Bother all my visitors! Let them rage to their hearts’ content! My uncle is
presiding there.”
“How, how can I thank you!” Pulcheria Alexandrovna was beginning, once
more pressing Razumihin’s hands, but Raskolnikov interrupted her again.
“I can’t have it! I can’t have it!” he repeated irritably, “don’t worry me!
Enough, go away... I can’t stand it!”
“Come, mamma, come out of the room at least for a minute,” Dounia
whispered in dismay; “we are distressing him, that’s evident.”
“Mayn’t I look at him after three years?” wept Pulcheria Alexandrovna.
“Stay,” he stopped them again, “you keep interrupting me, and my ideas get
muddled.... Have you seen Luzhin?”
“No, Rodya, but he knows already of our arrival. We have heard, Rodya, that
Pyotr Petrovitch was so kind as to visit you today,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna
added somewhat timidly.
“Yes... he was so kind... Dounia, I promised Luzhin I’d throw him downstairs
and told him to go to hell....”
“Rodya, what are you saying! Surely, you don’t mean to tell us...” Pulcheria
Alexandrovna began in alarm, but she stopped, looking at Dounia.
 
