A moment’s silence followed. Pyotr Petrovitch deliberately drew out a
cambric handkerchief reeking of scent and blew his nose with an air of a
benevolent man who felt himself slighted, and was firmly resolved to insist on
an explanation. In the passage the idea had occurred to him to keep on his
overcoat and walk away, and so give the two ladies a sharp and emphatic lesson
and make them feel the gravity of the position. But he could not bring himself to
do this. Besides, he could not endure uncertainty, and he wanted an explanation:
if his request had been so openly disobeyed, there was something behind it, and
in that case it was better to find it out beforehand; it rested with him to punish
them and there would always be time for that.
“I trust you had a favourable journey,” he inquired officially of Pulcheria
Alexandrovna.
“Oh, very, Pyotr Petrovitch.”
“I am gratified to hear it. And Avdotya Romanovna is not over-fatigued
either?”
“I am young and strong, I don’t get tired, but it was a great strain for mother,”
answered Dounia.
“That’s unavoidable! our national railways are of terrible length. ‘Mother
Russia,’ as they say, is a vast country.... In spite of all my desire to do so, I was
unable to meet you yesterday. But I trust all passed off without inconvenience?”
“Oh, no, Pyotr Petrovitch, it was all terribly disheartening,” Pulcheria
Alexandrovna hastened to declare with peculiar intonation, “and if Dmitri
Prokofitch had not been sent us, I really believe by God Himself, we should have
been utterly lost. Here, he is! Dmitri Prokofitch Razumihin,” she added,
introducing him to Luzhin.
“I had the pleasure... yesterday,” muttered Pyotr Petrovitch with a hostile
glance sidelong at Razumihin; then he scowled and was silent.
Pyotr Petrovitch belonged to that class of persons, on the surface very polite in
society, who make a great point of punctiliousness, but who, directly they are
crossed in anything, are completely disconcerted, and become more like sacks of
flour than elegant and lively men of society. Again all was silent; Raskolnikov
was obstinately mute, Avdotya Romanovna was unwilling to open the
conversation too soon. Razumihin had nothing to say, so Pulcheria
Alexandrovna was anxious again.
“Marfa Petrovna is dead, have you heard?” she began having recourse to her
leading item of conversation.
“To be sure, I heard so. I was immediately informed, and I have come to make
you acquainted with the fact that Arkady Ivanovitch Svidrigaïlov set off in haste
for Petersburg immediately after his wife’s funeral. So at least I have excellent
authority for believing.”
 
