He preferred to attribute it to the dead weight of instinct which he could not
step over, again through weakness and meanness. He looked at his fellow
prisoners and was amazed to see how they all loved life and prized it. It seemed
to him that they loved and valued life more in prison than in freedom. What
terrible agonies and privations some of them, the tramps for instance, had
endured! Could they care so much for a ray of sunshine, for the primeval forest,
the cold spring hidden away in some unseen spot, which the tramp had marked
three years before, and longed to see again, as he might to see his sweetheart,
dreaming of the green grass round it and the bird singing in the bush? As he
went on he saw still more inexplicable examples.
In prison, of course, there was a great deal he did not see and did not want to
see; he lived as it were with downcast eyes. It was loathsome and unbearable for
him to look. But in the end there was much that surprised him and he began, as it
were involuntarily, to notice much that he had not suspected before. What
surprised him most of all was the terrible impossible gulf that lay between him
and all the rest. They seemed to be a different species, and he looked at them and
they at him with distrust and hostility. He felt and knew the reasons of his
isolation, but he would never have admitted till then that those reasons were so
deep and strong. There were some Polish exiles, political prisoners, among them.
They simply looked down upon all the rest as ignorant churls; but Raskolnikov
could not look upon them like that. He saw that these ignorant men were in
many respects far wiser than the Poles. There were some Russians who were just
as contemptuous, a former officer and two seminarists. Raskolnikov saw their
mistake as clearly. He was disliked and avoided by everyone; they even began to
hate him at last—why, he could not tell. Men who had been far more guilty
despised and laughed at his crime.
“You’re a gentleman,” they used to say. “You shouldn’t hack about with an
axe; that’s not a gentleman’s work.”