“You’ll spoil everything,” Razumihin answered in the same whisper, losing
patience—“come out on to the stairs, anyway. Nastasya, show a light! I assure
you,” he went on in a half whisper on the stairs—“that he was almost beating the
doctor and me this afternoon! Do you understand? The doctor himself! Even he
gave way and left him, so as not to irritate him. I remained downstairs on guard,
but he dressed at once and slipped off. And he will slip off again if you irritate
him, at this time of night, and will do himself some mischief....”
“What are you saying?”
“And Avdotya Romanovna can’t possibly be left in those lodgings without
you. Just think where you are staying! That blackguard Pyotr Petrovitch couldn’t
find you better lodgings... But you know I’ve had a little to drink, and that’s
what makes me... swear; don’t mind it....”
“But I’ll go to the landlady here,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna insisted, “I’ll
beseech her to find some corner for Dounia and me for the night. I can’t leave
him like that, I cannot!”
This conversation took place on the landing just before the landlady’s door.
Nastasya lighted them from a step below. Razumihin was in extraordinary
excitement. Half an hour earlier, while he was bringing Raskolnikov home, he
had indeed talked too freely, but he was aware of it himself, and his head was
clear in spite of the vast quantities he had imbibed. Now he was in a state
bordering on ecstasy, and all that he had drunk seemed to fly to his head with
redoubled effect. He stood with the two ladies, seizing both by their hands,
persuading them, and giving them reasons with astonishing plainness of speech,
and at almost every word he uttered, probably to emphasise his arguments, he
squeezed their hands painfully as in a vise. He stared at Avdotya Romanovna
without the least regard for good manners. They sometimes pulled their hands
out of his huge bony paws, but far from noticing what was the matter, he drew
them all the closer to him. If they’d told him to jump head foremost from the
staircase, he would have done it without thought or hesitation in their service.
Though Pulcheria Alexandrovna felt that the young man was really too eccentric
and pinched her hand too much, in her anxiety over her Rodya she looked on his
presence as providential, and was unwilling to notice all his peculiarities. But
though Avdotya Romanovna shared her anxiety, and was not of timorous
disposition, she could not see the glowing light in his eyes without wonder and
almost alarm. It was only the unbounded confidence inspired by Nastasya’s
account of her brother’s queer friend, which prevented her from trying to run
away from him, and to persuade her mother to do the same. She realised, too,
that even running away was perhaps impossible now. Ten minutes later,
however, she was considerably reassured; it was characteristic of Razumihin that
he showed his true nature at once, whatever mood he might be in, so that people
quickly saw the sort of man they had to deal with.
 
