She sank helplessly on the bed with her face in the pillows, but a moment later
she got up, moved quickly to him, seized both his hands and, gripping them tight
in her thin fingers, began looking into his face again with the same intent stare.
In this last desperate look she tried to look into him and catch some last hope.
But there was no hope; there was no doubt remaining; it was all true! Later on,
indeed, when she recalled that moment, she thought it strange and wondered
why she had seen at once that there was no doubt. She could not have said, for
instance, that she had foreseen something of the sort—and yet now, as soon as he
told her, she suddenly fancied that she had really foreseen this very thing.
“Stop, Sonia, enough! don’t torture me,” he begged her miserably.
It was not at all, not at all like this he had thought of telling her, but this is
how it happened.
She jumped up, seeming not to know what she was doing, and, wringing her
hands, walked into the middle of the room; but quickly went back and sat down
again beside him, her shoulder almost touching his. All of a sudden she started
as though she had been stabbed, uttered a cry and fell on her knees before him,
she did not know why.
“What have you done—what have you done to yourself?” she said in despair,
and, jumping up, she flung herself on his neck, threw her arms round him, and
held him tightly.
Raskolnikov drew back and looked at her with a mournful smile.
“You are a strange girl, Sonia—you kiss me and hug me when I tell you about
that.... You don’t think what you are doing.”
“There is no one—no one in the whole world now so unhappy as you!” she
cried in a frenzy, not hearing what he said, and she suddenly broke into violent
hysterical weeping.
A feeling long unfamiliar to him flooded his heart and softened it at once. He
did not struggle against it. Two tears started into his eyes and hung on his
eyelashes.
“Then you won’t leave me, Sonia?” he said, looking at her almost with hope.
“No, no, never, nowhere!” cried Sonia. “I will follow you, I will follow you
everywhere. Oh, my God! Oh, how miserable I am!... Why, why didn’t I know
you before! Why didn’t you come before? Oh, dear!”
“Here I have come.”