“And you, of course, are developing her... he-he! trying to prove to her that all
that modesty is nonsense?”
“Not at all, not at all! How coarsely, how stupidly—excuse me saying so—
you misunderstand the word development! Good heavens, how... crude you still
are! We are striving for the freedom of women and you have only one idea in
your head.... Setting aside the general question of chastity and feminine modesty
as useless in themselves and indeed prejudices, I fully accept her chastity with
me, because that’s for her to decide. Of course if she were to tell me herself that
she wanted me, I should think myself very lucky, because I like the girl very
much; but as it is, no one has ever treated her more courteously than I, with more
respect for her dignity... I wait in hopes, that’s all!”
“You had much better make her a present of something. I bet you never
thought of that.”
“You don’t understand, as I’ve told you already! Of course, she is in such a
position, but it’s another question. Quite another question! You simply despise
her. Seeing a fact which you mistakenly consider deserving of contempt, you
refuse to take a humane view of a fellow creature. You don’t know what a
character she is! I am only sorry that of late she has quite given up reading and
borrowing books. I used to lend them to her. I am sorry, too, that with all the
energy and resolution in protesting—which she has already shown once—she
has little self-reliance, little, so to say, independence, so as to break free from
certain prejudices and certain foolish ideas. Yet she thoroughly understands
some questions, for instance about kissing of hands, that is, that it’s an insult to a
woman for a man to kiss her hand, because it’s a sign of inequality. We had a
debate about it and I described it to her. She listened attentively to an account of
the workmen’s associations in France, too. Now I am explaining the question of
coming into the room in the future society.”
“And what’s that, pray?”
“We had a debate lately on the question: Has a member of the community the
right to enter another member’s room, whether man or woman, at any time... and
we decided that he has!”
“It might be at an inconvenient moment, he-he!”
Lebeziatnikov was really angry.