Sonia strained every nerve to listen.
“Then why... why, you said you did it to rob, but you took nothing?” she asked
quickly, catching at a straw.
“I don’t know.... I haven’t yet decided whether to take that money or not,” he
said, musing again; and, seeming to wake up with a start, he gave a brief ironical
smile. “Ach, what silly stuff I am talking, eh?”
The thought flashed through Sonia’s mind, wasn’t he mad? But she dismissed
it at once. “No, it was something else.” She could make nothing of it, nothing.
“Do you know, Sonia,” he said suddenly with conviction, “let me tell you: if
I’d simply killed because I was hungry,” laying stress on every word and looking
enigmatically but sincerely at her, “I should be happy now. You must believe
that! What would it matter to you,” he cried a moment later with a sort of
despair, “what would it matter to you if I were to confess that I did wrong? What
do you gain by such a stupid triumph over me? Ah, Sonia, was it for that I’ve
come to you to-day?”
Again Sonia tried to say something, but did not speak.
“I asked you to go with me yesterday because you are all I have left.”
“Go where?” asked Sonia timidly.
“Not to steal and not to murder, don’t be anxious,” he smiled bitterly. “We are
so different.... And you know, Sonia, it’s only now, only this moment that I
understand where I asked you to go with me yesterday! Yesterday when I said it
I did not know where. I asked you for one thing, I came to you for one thing—
not to leave me. You won’t leave me, Sonia?”
She squeezed his hand.
“And why, why did I tell her? Why did I let her know?” he cried a minute
later in despair, looking with infinite anguish at her. “Here you expect an
explanation from me, Sonia; you are sitting and waiting for it, I see that. But
what can I tell you? You won’t understand and will only suffer misery... on my
account! Well, you are crying and embracing me again. Why do you do it?
Because I couldn’t bear my burden and have come to throw it on another: you
suffer too, and I shall feel better! And can you love such a mean wretch?”
“But aren’t you suffering, too?” cried Sonia.
Again a wave of the same feeling surged into his heart, and again for an
instant softened it.