“Take him straight to the police station,” the man in the long coat jerked in
abruptly.
Raskolnikov looked intently at him over his shoulder and said in the same
slow, lazy tones:
“Come along.”
“Yes, take him,” the man went on more confidently. “Why was he going into
that, what’s in his mind, eh?”
“He’s not drunk, but God knows what’s the matter with him,” muttered the
workman.
“But what do you want?” the porter shouted again, beginning to get angry in
earnest—“Why are you hanging about?”
“You funk the police station then?” said Raskolnikov jeeringly.
“How funk it? Why are you hanging about?”
“He’s a rogue!” shouted the peasant woman.
“Why waste time talking to him?” cried the other porter, a huge peasant in a
full open coat and with keys on his belt. “Get along! He is a rogue and no
mistake. Get along!”
And seizing Raskolnikov by the shoulder he flung him into the street. He
lurched forward, but recovered his footing, looked at the spectators in silence
and walked away.
“Strange man!” observed the workman.
“There are strange folks about nowadays,” said the woman.
“You should have taken him to the police station all the same,” said the man in
the long coat.
“Better have nothing to do with him,” decided the big porter. “A regular
rogue! Just what he wants, you may be sure, but once take him up, you won’t get
rid of him.... We know the sort!”
“Shall I go there or not?” thought Raskolnikov, standing in the middle of the
thoroughfare at the cross-roads, and he looked about him, as though expecting
from someone a decisive word. But no sound came, all was dead and silent like
the stones on which he walked, dead to him, to him alone.... All at once at the
end of the street, two hundred yards away, in the gathering dusk he saw a crowd
and heard talk and shouts. In the middle of the crowd stood a carriage.... A light
gleamed in the middle of the street. “What is it?” Raskolnikov turned to the right
and went up to the crowd. He seemed to clutch at everything and smiled coldly
when he recognised it, for he had fully made up his mind to go to the police
station and knew that it would all soon be over. 
