“No, it was not only spring delirium,” said Dounia, with warm feeling.
He fixed a strained intent look on his sister, but did not hear or did not
understand her words. Then, completely lost in thought, he got up, went up to his
mother, kissed her, went back to his place and sat down.
“You love her even now?” said Pulcheria Alexandrovna, touched.
“Her? Now? Oh, yes.... You ask about her? No... that’s all now, as it were, in
another world... and so long ago. And indeed everything happening here seems
somehow far away.” He looked attentively at them. “You, now... I seem to be
looking at you from a thousand miles away... but, goodness knows why we are
talking of that! And what’s the use of asking about it?” he added with
annoyance, and biting his nails, fell into dreamy silence again.
“What a wretched lodging you have, Rodya! It’s like a tomb,” said Pulcheria
Alexandrovna, suddenly breaking the oppressive silence. “I am sure it’s quite
half through your lodging you have become so melancholy.”
“My lodging,” he answered, listlessly. “Yes, the lodging had a great deal to do
with it.... I thought that, too.... If only you knew, though, what a strange thing
you said just now, mother,” he said, laughing strangely.
A little more, and their companionship, this mother and this sister, with him
after three years’ absence, this intimate tone of conversation, in face of the utter
impossibility of really speaking about anything, would have been beyond his
power of endurance. But there was one urgent matter which must be settled one
way or the other that day—so he had decided when he woke. Now he was glad
to remember it, as a means of escape.
“Listen, Dounia,” he began, gravely and drily, “of course I beg your pardon
for yesterday, but I consider it my duty to tell you again that I do not withdraw
from my chief point. It is me or Luzhin. If I am a scoundrel, you must not be.
One is enough. If you marry Luzhin, I cease at once to look on you as a sister.”
“Rodya, Rodya! It is the same as yesterday again,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna
cried, mournfully. “And why do you call yourself a scoundrel? I can’t bear it.
You said the same yesterday.”
“Brother,” Dounia answered firmly and with the same dryness. “In all this
there is a mistake on your part. I thought it over at night, and found out the
mistake. It is all because you seem to fancy I am sacrificing myself to someone
and for someone. That is not the case at all. I am simply marrying for my own
sake, because things are hard for me. Though, of course, I shall be glad if I
succeed in being useful to my family. But that is not the chief motive for my
decision....”
“She is lying,” he thought to himself, biting his nails vindictively. “Proud
creature! She won’t admit she wants to do it out of charity! Too haughty! Oh,
base characters! They even love as though they hate.... Oh, how I... hate them
all!” 
