“But I’m not talking about that (though I did hear something). No, I’m talking
of the way you keep sighing and groaning now. The Schiller in you is in revolt
every moment, and now you tell me not to listen at doors. If that’s how you feel,
go and inform the police that you had this mischance: you made a little mistake
in your theory. But if you are convinced that one mustn’t listen at doors, but one
may murder old women at one’s pleasure, you’d better be off to America and
make haste. Run, young man! There may still be time. I’m speaking sincerely.
Haven’t you the money? I’ll give you the fare.”
“I’m not thinking of that at all,” Raskolnikov interrupted with disgust.
“I understand (but don’t put yourself out, don’t discuss it if you don’t want to).
I understand the questions you are worrying over—moral ones, aren’t they?
Duties of citizen and man? Lay them all aside. They are nothing to you now, haha!
You’ll say you are still a man and a citizen. If so you ought not to have got
into this coil. It’s no use taking up a job you are not fit for. Well, you’d better
shoot yourself, or don’t you want to?”
“You seem trying to enrage me, to make me leave you.”
“What a queer fellow! But here we are. Welcome to the staircase. You see,
that’s the way to Sofya Semyonovna. Look, there is no one at home. Don’t you
believe me? Ask Kapernaumov. She leaves the key with him. Here is Madame
de Kapernaumov herself. Hey, what? She is rather deaf. Has she gone out?
Where? Did you hear? She is not in and won’t be till late in the evening
probably. Well, come to my room; you wanted to come and see me, didn’t you?
Here we are. Madame Resslich’s not at home. She is a woman who is always
busy, an excellent woman I assure you.... She might have been of use to you if
you had been a little more sensible. Now, see! I take this five-per-cent bond out
of the bureau—see what a lot I’ve got of them still—this one will be turned into
cash to-day. I mustn’t waste any more time. The bureau is locked, the flat is
locked, and here we are again on the stairs. Shall we take a cab? I’m going to the
Islands. Would you like a lift? I’ll take this carriage. Ah, you refuse? You are
tired of it! Come for a drive! I believe it will come on to rain. Never mind, we’ll
put down the hood....”