“Yes, a means of escape had come! It had been too stifling, too cramping, the
burden had been too agonising. A lethargy had come upon him at times. From
the moment of the scene with Nikolay at Porfiry’s he had been suffocating,
penned in without hope of escape. After Nikolay’s confession, on that very day
had come the scene with Sonia; his behaviour and his last words had been utterly
unlike anything he could have imagined beforehand; he had grown feebler,
instantly and fundamentally! And he had agreed at the time with Sonia, he had
agreed in his heart he could not go on living alone with such a thing on his mind!
“And Svidrigaïlov was a riddle... He worried him, that was true, but somehow
not on the same point. He might still have a struggle to come with Svidrigaïlov.
Svidrigaïlov, too, might be a means of escape; but Porfiry was a different matter.
“And so Porfiry himself had explained it to Razumihin, had explained it
psychologically. He had begun bringing in his damned psychology again!
Porfiry? But to think that Porfiry should for one moment believe that Nikolay
was guilty, after what had passed between them before Nikolay’s appearance,
after that tête-à-tête interview, which could have only one explanation? (During
those days Raskolnikov had often recalled passages in that scene with Porfiry; he
could not bear to let his mind rest on it.) Such words, such gestures had passed
between them, they had exchanged such glances, things had been said in such a
tone and had reached such a pass, that Nikolay, whom Porfiry had seen through
at the first word, at the first gesture, could not have shaken his conviction.
“And to think that even Razumihin had begun to suspect! The scene in the
corridor under the lamp had produced its effect then. He had rushed to Porfiry....
But what had induced the latter to receive him like that? What had been his
object in putting Razumihin off with Nikolay? He must have some plan; there
was some design, but what was it? It was true that a long time had passed since
that morning—too long a time—and no sight nor sound of Porfiry. Well, that
was a bad sign....”
Raskolnikov took his cap and went out of the room, still pondering. It was the
first time for a long while that he had felt clear in his mind, at least. “I must
settle Svidrigaïlov,” he thought, “and as soon as possible; he, too, seems to be
waiting for me to come to him of my own accord.” And at that moment there
was such a rush of hate in his weary heart that he might have killed either of
those two—Porfiry or Svidrigaïlov. At least he felt that he would be capable of
doing it later, if not now.
“We shall see, we shall see,” he repeated to himself.