Sonia too jumped up from her chair and looked in dismay at Svidrigaïlov. She
longed to speak, to ask a question, but for the first moments she did not dare and
did not know how to begin.
“How can you... how can you be going now, in such rain?”
“Why, be starting for America, and be stopped by rain! Ha, ha! Good-bye,
Sofya Semyonovna, my dear! Live and live long, you will be of use to others. By
the way... tell Mr. Razumihin I send my greetings to him. Tell him Arkady
Ivanovitch Svidrigaïlov sends his greetings. Be sure to.”
He went out, leaving Sonia in a state of wondering anxiety and vague
apprehension.
It appeared afterwards that on the same evening, at twenty past eleven, he
made another very eccentric and unexpected visit. The rain still persisted.
Drenched to the skin, he walked into the little flat where the parents of his
betrothed lived, in Third Street in Vassilyevsky Island. He knocked some time
before he was admitted, and his visit at first caused great perturbation; but
Svidrigaïlov could be very fascinating when he liked, so that the first, and indeed
very intelligent surmise of the sensible parents that Svidrigaïlov had probably
had so much to drink that he did not know what he was doing vanished
immediately. The decrepit father was wheeled in to see Svidrigaïlov by the
tender and sensible mother, who as usual began the conversation with various
irrelevant questions. She never asked a direct question, but began by smiling and
rubbing her hands and then, if she were obliged to ascertain something—for
instance, when Svidrigaïlov would like to have the wedding—she would begin
by interested and almost eager questions about Paris and the court life there, and
only by degrees brought the conversation round to Third Street. On other
occasions this had of course been very impressive, but this time Arkady
Ivanovitch seemed particularly impatient, and insisted on seeing his betrothed at
once, though he had been informed, to begin with, that she had already gone to
bed. The girl of course appeared.