“Then you believe in the New Jerusalem, do you?”
“I do,” Raskolnikov answered firmly; as he said these words and during the
whole preceding tirade he kept his eyes on one spot on the carpet.
“And... and do you believe in God? Excuse my curiosity.”
“I do,” repeated Raskolnikov, raising his eyes to Porfiry.
“And... do you believe in Lazarus’ rising from the dead?”
“I... I do. Why do you ask all this?”
“You believe it literally?”
“Literally.”
“You don’t say so.... I asked from curiosity. Excuse me. But let us go back to
the question; they are not always executed. Some, on the contrary...”
“Triumph in their lifetime? Oh, yes, some attain their ends in this life, and
then...”
“They begin executing other people?”
“If it’s necessary; indeed, for the most part they do. Your remark is very
witty.”
“Thank you. But tell me this: how do you distinguish those extraordinary
people from the ordinary ones? Are there signs at their birth? I feel there ought
to be more exactitude, more external definition. Excuse the natural anxiety of a
practical law-abiding citizen, but couldn’t they adopt a special uniform, for
instance, couldn’t they wear something, be branded in some way? For you know
if confusion arises and a member of one category imagines that he belongs to the
other, begins to ‘eliminate obstacles’ as you so happily expressed it, then...”
“Oh, that very often happens! That remark is wittier than the other.”
“Thank you.”
“No reason to; but take note that the mistake can only arise in the first
category, that is among the ordinary people (as I perhaps unfortunately called
them). In spite of their predisposition to obedience very many of them, through a
playfulness of nature, sometimes vouchsafed even to the cow, like to imagine
themselves advanced people, ‘destroyers,’ and to push themselves into the ‘new
movement,’ and this quite sincerely. Meanwhile the really new people are very
often unobserved by them, or even despised as reactionaries of grovelling
tendencies. But I don’t think there is any considerable danger here, and you
really need not be uneasy for they never go very far. Of course, they might have
a thrashing sometimes for letting their fancy run away with them and to teach
them their place, but no more; in fact, even this isn’t necessary as they castigate
themselves, for they are very conscientious: some perform this service for one
another and others chastise themselves with their own hands.... They will impose
various public acts of penitence upon themselves with a beautiful and edifying
effect; in fact you’ve nothing to be uneasy about.... It’s a law of nature.” 
