“Ah these cigarettes!” Porfiry Petrovitch ejaculated at last, having lighted one.
“They are pernicious, positively pernicious, and yet I can’t give them up! I
cough, I begin to have tickling in my throat and a difficulty in breathing. You
know I am a coward, I went lately to Dr. B——n; he always gives at least half
an hour to each patient. He positively laughed looking at me; he sounded me:
‘Tobacco’s bad for you,’ he said, ‘your lungs are affected.’ But how am I to give
it up? What is there to take its place? I don’t drink, that’s the mischief, he-he-he,
that I don’t. Everything is relative, Rodion Romanovitch, everything is relative!”
“Why, he’s playing his professional tricks again,” Raskolnikov thought with
disgust. All the circumstances of their last interview suddenly came back to him,
and he felt a rush of the feeling that had come upon him then.
“I came to see you the day before yesterday, in the evening; you didn’t
know?” Porfiry Petrovitch went on, looking round the room. “I came into this
very room. I was passing by, just as I did to-day, and I thought I’d return your
call. I walked in as your door was wide open, I looked round, waited and went
out without leaving my name with your servant. Don’t you lock your door?”
Raskolnikov’s face grew more and more gloomy. Porfiry seemed to guess his
state of mind.
“I’ve come to have it out with you, Rodion Romanovitch, my dear fellow! I
owe you an explanation and must give it to you,” he continued with a slight
smile, just patting Raskolnikov’s knee.
But almost at the same instant a serious and careworn look came into his face;
to his surprise Raskolnikov saw a touch of sadness in it. He had never seen and
never suspected such an expression in his face.
“A strange scene passed between us last time we met, Rodion Romanovitch.
Our first interview, too, was a strange one; but then... and one thing after
another! This is the point: I have perhaps acted unfairly to you; I feel it. Do you
remember how we parted? Your nerves were unhinged and your knees were
shaking and so were mine. And, you know, our behaviour was unseemly, even
ungentlemanly. And yet we are gentlemen, above all, in any case, gentlemen;
that must be understood. Do you remember what we came to?... and it was quite
indecorous.”