“You shameful hussy!” he shouted suddenly at the top of his voice. (The lady
in mourning had left the office.) “What was going on at your house last night?
Eh! A disgrace again, you’re a scandal to the whole street. Fighting and drinking
again. Do you want the house of correction? Why, I have warned you ten times
over that I would not let you off the eleventh! And here you are again, again,
you... you...!”
The paper fell out of Raskolnikov’s hands, and he looked wildly at the smart
lady who was so unceremoniously treated. But he soon saw what it meant, and at
once began to find positive amusement in the scandal. He listened with pleasure,
so that he longed to laugh and laugh... all his nerves were on edge.
“Ilya Petrovitch!” the head clerk was beginning anxiously, but stopped short,
for he knew from experience that the enraged assistant could not be stopped
except by force.
As for the smart lady, at first she positively trembled before the storm. But,
strange to say, the more numerous and violent the terms of abuse became, the
more amiable she looked, and the more seductive the smiles she lavished on the
terrible assistant. She moved uneasily, and curtsied incessantly, waiting
impatiently for a chance of putting in her word: and at last she found it.
“There was no sort of noise or fighting in my house, Mr. Captain,” she
pattered all at once, like peas dropping, speaking Russian confidently, though
with a strong German accent, “and no sort of scandal, and his honour came
drunk, and it’s the whole truth I am telling, Mr. Captain, and I am not to blame....
Mine is an honourable house, Mr. Captain, and honourable behaviour, Mr.
Captain, and I always, always dislike any scandal myself. But he came quite
tipsy, and asked for three bottles again, and then he lifted up one leg, and began
playing the pianoforte with one foot, and that is not at all right in an honourable
house, and he ganz broke the piano, and it was very bad manners indeed and I
said so. And he took up a bottle and began hitting everyone with it. And then I
called the porter, and Karl came, and he took Karl and hit him in the eye; and he
hit Henriette in the eye, too, and gave me five slaps on the cheek. And it was so
ungentlemanly in an honourable house, Mr. Captain, and I screamed. And he
opened the window over the canal, and stood in the window, squealing like a
little pig; it was a disgrace. The idea of squealing like a little pig at the window
into the street! Fie upon him! And Karl pulled him away from the window by his
coat, and it is true, Mr. Captain, he tore sein rock. And then he shouted that man
muss pay him fifteen roubles damages. And I did pay him, Mr. Captain, five
roubles for sein rock. And he is an ungentlemanly visitor and caused all the
scandal. ‘I will show you up,’ he said, ‘for I can write to all the papers about
you.’”
 
