“Ha! that’s the porter’s voice.... What does he want?”
He jumped up and sat on the sofa. The beating of his heart was a positive pain.
“Then who can have latched the door?” retorted Nastasya. “He’s taken to
bolting himself in! As if he were worth stealing! Open, you stupid, wake up!”
“What do they want? Why the porter? All’s discovered. Resist or open? Come
what may!...”
He half rose, stooped forward and unlatched the door.
His room was so small that he could undo the latch without leaving the bed.
Yes; the porter and Nastasya were standing there.
Nastasya stared at him in a strange way. He glanced with a defiant and
desperate air at the porter, who without a word held out a grey folded paper
sealed with bottle-wax.
“A notice from the office,” he announced, as he gave him the paper.
“From what office?”
“A summons to the police office, of course. You know which office.”
“To the police?... What for?...”
“How can I tell? You’re sent for, so you go.”
The man looked at him attentively, looked round the room and turned to go
away.
“He’s downright ill!” observed Nastasya, not taking her eyes off him. The
porter turned his head for a moment. “He’s been in a fever since yesterday,” she
added.
Raskolnikov made no response and held the paper in his hands, without
opening it. “Don’t you get up then,” Nastasya went on compassionately, seeing
that he was letting his feet down from the sofa. “You’re ill, and so don’t go;
there’s no such hurry. What have you got there?”
He looked; in his right hand he held the shreds he had cut from his trousers,
the sock, and the rags of the pocket. So he had been asleep with them in his
hand. Afterwards reflecting upon it, he remembered that half waking up in his
fever, he had grasped all this tightly in his hand and so fallen asleep again.
“Look at the rags he’s collected and sleeps with them, as though he has got
hold of a treasure...”
And Nastasya went off into her hysterical giggle.
Instantly he thrust them all under his great coat and fixed his eyes intently
upon her. Far as he was from being capable of rational reflection at that moment,
he felt that no one would behave like that with a person who was going to be
arrested. “But... the police?” 
