“God forgive me, I simply rejoiced at her death. Though I don’t know which
of them would have caused most misery to the other—he to her or she to him,”
Pulcheria Alexandrovna concluded. Then she began tentatively questioning him
about the scene on the previous day with Luzhin, hesitating and continually
glancing at Dounia, obviously to the latter’s annoyance. This incident more than
all the rest evidently caused her uneasiness, even consternation. Razumihin
described it in detail again, but this time he added his own conclusions: he
openly blamed Raskolnikov for intentionally insulting Pyotr Petrovitch, not
seeking to excuse him on the score of his illness.
“He had planned it before his illness,” he added.
“I think so, too,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna agreed with a dejected air. But she
was very much surprised at hearing Razumihin express himself so carefully and
even with a certain respect about Pyotr Petrovitch. Avdotya Romanovna, too,
was struck by it.
“So this is your opinion of Pyotr Petrovitch?” Pulcheria Alexandrovna could
not resist asking.
“I can have no other opinion of your daughter’s future husband,” Razumihin
answered firmly and with warmth, “and I don’t say it simply from vulgar
politeness, but because... simply because Avdotya Romanovna has of her own
free will deigned to accept this man. If I spoke so rudely of him last night, it was
because I was disgustingly drunk and... mad besides; yes, mad, crazy, I lost my
head completely... and this morning I am ashamed of it.”
He crimsoned and ceased speaking. Avdotya Romanovna flushed, but did not
break the silence. She had not uttered a word from the moment they began to
speak of Luzhin.
Without her support Pulcheria Alexandrovna obviously did not know what to
do. At last, faltering and continually glancing at her daughter, she confessed that
she was exceedingly worried by one circumstance.
“You see, Dmitri Prokofitch,” she began. “I’ll be perfectly open with Dmitri
Prokofitch, Dounia?”
“Of course, mother,” said Avdotya Romanovna emphatically 
