A fly flew up suddenly and struck the window
pane with a plaintive buzz. At that moment he noticed in the corner between the
window and the little cupboard something like a cloak hanging on the wall.
“Why is that cloak here?” he thought, “it wasn’t there before....” He went up to it
quietly and felt that there was someone hiding behind it. He cautiously moved
the cloak and saw, sitting on a chair in the corner, the old woman bent double so
that he couldn’t see her face; but it was she. He stood over her. “She is afraid,”
he thought. He stealthily took the axe from the noose and struck her one blow,
then another on the skull. But strange to say she did not stir, as though she were
made of wood. He was frightened, bent down nearer and tried to look at her; but
she, too, bent her head lower. He bent right down to the ground and peeped up
into her face from below, he peeped and turned cold with horror: the old woman
was sitting and laughing, shaking with noiseless laughter, doing her utmost that
he should not hear it. Suddenly he fancied that the door from the bedroom was
opened a little and that there was laughter and whispering within. He was
overcome with frenzy and he began hitting the old woman on the head with all
his force, but at every blow of the axe the laughter and whispering from the
bedroom grew louder and the old woman was simply shaking with mirth. He
was rushing away, but the passage was full of people, the doors of the flats stood
open and on the landing, on the stairs and everywhere below there were people,
rows of heads, all looking, but huddled together in silence and expectation.
Something gripped his heart, his legs were rooted to the spot, they would not
move.... He tried to scream and woke up.
He drew a deep breath—but his dream seemed strangely to persist: his door
was flung open and a man whom he had never seen stood in the doorway
watching him intently.
Raskolnikov had hardly opened his eyes and he instantly closed them again.
He lay on his back without stirring.
“Is it still a dream?” he wondered and again raised his eyelids hardly
perceptibly; the stranger was standing in the same place, still watching him.
He stepped cautiously into the room, carefully closing the door after him,
went up to the table, paused a moment, still keeping his eyes on Raskolnikov,
and noiselessly seated himself on the chair by the sofa; he put his hat on the floor
beside him and leaned his hands on his cane and his chin on his hands. It was
evident that he was prepared to wait indefinitely. As far as Raskolnikov could
make out from his stolen glances, he was a man no longer young, stout, with a
full, fair, almost whitish beard.
Ten minutes passed. It was still light, but beginning to get dusk. There was
complete stillness in the room. Not a sound came from the stairs. Only a big fly
buzzed and fluttered against the window pane. It was unbearable at last.
Raskolnikov suddenly got up and sat on the sofa.
“Come, tell me what you want.”
“I knew you were not asleep, but only pretending,” the stranger answered
oddly, laughing calmly. “Arkady Ivanovitch Svidrigaïlov, allow me to introduce
myself....” 
