What is he up to, what does he take me for?” Raskolnikov asked himself in
amazement, raising his head and looking with open eyes on Porfiry.
“I’ve decided openness is better between us,” Porfiry Petrovitch went on,
turning his head away and dropping his eyes, as though unwilling to disconcert
his former victim and as though disdaining his former wiles. “Yes, such
suspicions and such scenes cannot continue for long. Nikolay put a stop to it, or I
don’t know what we might not have come to. That damned workman was sitting
at the time in the next room—can you realise that? You know that, of course; and
I am aware that he came to you afterwards. But what you supposed then was not
true: I had not sent for anyone, I had made no kind of arrangements. You ask
why I hadn’t? What shall I say to you? it had all come upon me so suddenly. I
had scarcely sent for the porters (you noticed them as you went out, I dare say).
An idea flashed upon me; I was firmly convinced at the time, you see, Rodion
Romanovitch. Come, I thought—even if I let one thing slip for a time, I shall get
hold of something else—I shan’t lose what I want, anyway. You are nervously
irritable, Rodion Romanovitch, by temperament; it’s out of proportion with other
qualities of your heart and character, which I flatter myself I have to some extent
divined. Of course I did reflect even then that it does not always happen that a
man gets up and blurts out his whole story. It does happen sometimes, if you
make a man lose all patience, though even then it’s rare. I was capable of
realising that. If I only had a fact, I thought, the least little fact to go upon,
something I could lay hold of, something tangible, not merely psychological. For
if a man is guilty, you must be able to get something substantial out of him; one
may reckon upon most surprising results indeed. I was reckoning on your
temperament, Rodion Romanovitch, on your temperament above all things! I
had great hopes of you at that time.”
“But what are you driving at now?” Raskolnikov muttered at last, asking the
question without thinking.
“What is he talking about?” he wondered distractedly, “does he really take me
to be innocent?”