“Yes, he was fond of drink, he was fond of it, he did drink!” cried the
commissariat clerk, gulping down his twelfth glass of vodka.
“My late husband certainly had that weakness, and everyone knows it,”
Katerina Ivanovna attacked him at once, “but he was a kind and honourable
man, who loved and respected his family. The worst of it was his good nature
made him trust all sorts of disreputable people, and he drank with fellows who
were not worth the sole of his shoe. Would you believe it, Rodion Romanovitch,
they found a gingerbread cock in his pocket; he was dead drunk, but he did not
forget the children!”
“A cock? Did you say a cock?” shouted the commissariat clerk.
Katerina Ivanovna did not vouchsafe a reply. She sighed, lost in thought.
“No doubt you think, like everyone, that I was too severe with him,” she went
on, addressing Raskolnikov. “But that’s not so! He respected me, he respected
me very much! He was a kind-hearted man! And how sorry I was for him
sometimes! He would sit in a corner and look at me, I used to feel so sorry for
him, I used to want to be kind to him and then would think to myself: ‘Be kind
to him and he will drink again,’ it was only by severity that you could keep him
within bounds.”
“Yes, he used to get his hair pulled pretty often,” roared the commissariat
clerk again, swallowing another glass of vodka.
“Some fools would be the better for a good drubbing, as well as having their
hair pulled. I am not talking of my late husband now!” Katerina Ivanovna
snapped at him.
The flush on her cheeks grew more and more marked, her chest heaved. In
another minute she would have been ready to make a scene. Many of the visitors
were sniggering, evidently delighted. They began poking the commissariat clerk
and whispering something to him. They were evidently trying to egg him on.
“Allow me to ask what are you alluding to,” began the clerk, “that is to say,
whose... about whom... did you say just now... But I don’t care! That’s nonsense!
Widow! I forgive you.... Pass!”
And he took another drink of vodka.
Raskolnikov sat in silence, listening with disgust. He only ate from politeness,
just tasting the food that Katerina Ivanovna was continually putting on his plate,
to avoid hurting her feelings. He watched Sonia intently. But Sonia became more
and more anxious and distressed; she, too, foresaw that the dinner would not end
peaceably, and saw with terror Katerina Ivanovna’s growing irritation. She knew
that she, Sonia, was the chief reason for the ‘genteel’ ladies’ contemptuous
treatment of Katerina Ivanovna’s invitation. She had heard from Amalia
Ivanovna that the mother was positively offended at the invitation and had asked
the question: “How could she let her daughter sit down beside that young
person?” Sonia had a feeling that Katerina Ivanovna had already heard this and
an insult to Sonia meant more to Katerina Ivanovna than an insult to herself, her
children, or her father, Sonia knew that Katerina Ivanovna would not be satisfied
now, “till she had shown those draggletails that they were both...” To make
matters worse someone passed Sonia, from the other end of the table, a plate
with two hearts pierced with an arrow, cut out of black bread. Katerina Ivanovna
flushed crimson and at once said aloud across the table that the man who sent it
was “a drunken ass!”