It was like this, or somewhat like this, that Raskolnikov wound up his speech
which was followed very attentively, though often interrupted by exclamations
from his audience. But in spite of interruptions he spoke clearly, calmly, exactly,
firmly. His decisive voice, his tone of conviction and his stern face made a great
impression on everyone.
“Yes, yes, that’s it,” Lebeziatnikov assented gleefully, “that must be it, for he
asked me, as soon as Sofya Semyonovna came into our room, whether you were
here, whether I had seen you among Katerina Ivanovna’s guests. He called me
aside to the window and asked me in secret. It was essential for him that you
should be here! That’s it, that’s it!”
Luzhin smiled contemptuously and did not speak. But he was very pale. He
seemed to be deliberating on some means of escape. Perhaps he would have
been glad to give up everything and get away, but at the moment this was
scarcely possible. It would have implied admitting the truth of the accusations
brought against him. Moreover, the company, which had already been excited by
drink, was now too much stirred to allow it. The commissariat clerk, though
indeed he had not grasped the whole position, was shouting louder than anyone
and was making some suggestions very unpleasant to Luzhin. But not all those
present were drunk; lodgers came in from all the rooms. The three Poles were
tremendously excited and were continually shouting at him: “The pan is a
lajdak!” and muttering threats in Polish. Sonia had been listening with strained
attention, though she too seemed unable to grasp it all; she seemed as though she
had just returned to consciousness. She did not take her eyes off Raskolnikov,
feeling that all her safety lay in him. Katerina Ivanovna breathed hard and
painfully and seemed fearfully exhausted. Amalia Ivanovna stood looking more
stupid than anyone, with her mouth wide open, unable to make out what had
happened. She only saw that Pyotr Petrovitch had somehow come to grief.
Raskolnikov was attempting to speak again, but they did not let him.
Everyone was crowding round Luzhin with threats and shouts of abuse. But
Pyotr Petrovitch was not intimidated. Seeing that his accusation of Sonia had
completely failed, he had recourse to insolence:
“Allow me, gentlemen, allow me! Don’t squeeze, let me pass!” he said,
making his way through the crowd. “And no threats, if you please! I assure you
it will be useless, you will gain nothing by it. On the contrary, you’ll have to
answer, gentlemen, for violently obstructing the course of justice. The thief has
been more than unmasked, and I shall prosecute. Our judges are not so blind
and... not so drunk, and will not believe the testimony of two notorious infidels,
agitators, and atheists, who accuse me from motives of personal revenge which
they are foolish enough to admit.... Yes, allow me to pass!”