I have noticed more than once in my life that husbands don’t quite
get on with their mothers-in-law, and I don’t want to be the least bit in anyone’s
way, and for my own sake, too, would rather be quite independent, so long as I
have a crust of bread of my own, and such children as you and Dounia. If
possible, I would settle somewhere near you, for the most joyful piece of news,
dear Rodya, I have kept for the end of my letter: know then, my dear boy, that
we may, perhaps, be all together in a very short time and may embrace one
another again after a separation of almost three years! It is settled for certain that
Dounia and I are to set off for Petersburg, exactly when I don’t know, but very,
very soon, possibly in a week. It all depends on Pyotr Petrovitch who will let us
know when he has had time to look round him in Petersburg. To suit his own
arrangements he is anxious to have the ceremony as soon as possible, even
before the fast of Our Lady, if it could be managed, or if that is too soon to be
ready, immediately after. Oh, with what happiness I shall press you to my heart!
Dounia is all excitement at the joyful thought of seeing you, she said one day in
joke that she would be ready to marry Pyotr Petrovitch for that alone. She is an
angel! She is not writing anything to you now, and has only told me to write that
she has so much, so much to tell you that she is not going to take up her pen
now, for a few lines would tell you nothing, and it would only mean upsetting
herself; she bids me send you her love and innumerable kisses. But although we
shall be meeting so soon, perhaps I shall send you as much money as I can in a
day or two. Now that everyone has heard that Dounia is to marry Pyotr
Petrovitch, my credit has suddenly improved and I know that Afanasy
Ivanovitch will trust me now even to seventy-five roubles on the security of my
pension, so that perhaps I shall be able to send you twenty-five or even thirty
roubles. I would send you more, but I am uneasy about our travelling expenses;
for though Pyotr Petrovitch has been so kind as to undertake part of the expenses
of the journey, that is to say, he has taken upon himself the conveyance of our
bags and big trunk (which will be conveyed through some acquaintances of his),
we must reckon upon some expense on our arrival in Petersburg, where we can’t
be left without a halfpenny, at least for the first few days. But we have calculated
it all, Dounia and I, to the last penny, and we see that the journey will not cost
very much. It is only ninety versts from us to the railway and we have come to
an agreement with a driver we know, so as to be in readiness; and from there
Dounia and I can travel quite comfortably third class. So that I may very likely
be able to send to you not twenty-five, but thirty roubles. But enough; I have
covered two sheets already and there is no space left for more; our whole history,
but so many events have happened! And now, my precious Rodya, I embrace
you and send you a mother’s blessing till we meet.  
