“No, I am not.”
Raskolnikov got up from the sofa. As he had mounted the stairs to
Razumihin’s, he had not realised that he would be meeting his friend face to
face. Now, in a flash, he knew, that what he was least of all disposed for at that
moment was to be face to face with anyone in the wide world. His spleen rose
within him. He almost choked with rage at himself as soon as he crossed
Razumihin’s threshold.
“Good-bye,” he said abruptly, and walked to the door.
“Stop, stop! You queer fish.”
“I don’t want to,” said the other, again pulling away his hand.
“Then why the devil have you come? Are you mad, or what? Why, this is...
almost insulting! I won’t let you go like that.”
“Well, then, I came to you because I know no one but you who could help... to
begin... because you are kinder than anyone—cleverer, I mean, and can judge...
and now I see that I want nothing. Do you hear? Nothing at all... no one’s
services... no one’s sympathy. I am by myself... alone. Come, that’s enough.
Leave me alone.”
“Stay a minute, you sweep! You are a perfect madman. As you like for all I
care. I have no lessons, do you see, and I don’t care about that, but there’s a
bookseller, Heruvimov—and he takes the place of a lesson. I would not
exchange him for five lessons. He’s doing publishing of a kind, and issuing
natural science manuals and what a circulation they have! The very titles are
worth the money! You always maintained that I was a fool, but by Jove, my boy,
there are greater fools than I am! Now he is setting up for being advanced, not
that he has an inkling of anything, but, of course, I encourage him. Here are two
signatures of the German text—in my opinion, the crudest charlatanism; it
discusses the question, ‘Is woman a human being?’ And, of course, triumphantly
proves that she is. Heruvimov is going to bring out this work as a contribution to
the woman question; I am translating it; he will expand these two and a half
signatures into six, we shall make up a gorgeous title half a page long and bring
it out at half a rouble. It will do! He pays me six roubles the signature, it works
out to about fifteen roubles for the job, and I’ve had six already in advance.
When we have finished this, we are going to begin a translation about whales,
and then some of the dullest scandals out of the second part of Les Confessions
we have marked for translation; somebody has told Heruvimov, that Rousseau
was a kind of Radishchev. 
