“To Petersburg? here?” Dounia asked in alarm and looked at her mother.
“Yes, indeed, and doubtless not without some design, having in view the
rapidity of his departure, and all the circumstances preceding it.”
“Good heavens! won’t he leave Dounia in peace even here?” cried Pulcheria
Alexandrovna.
“I imagine that neither you nor Avdotya Romanovna have any grounds for
uneasiness, unless, of course, you are yourselves desirous of getting into
communication with him. For my part I am on my guard, and am now
discovering where he is lodging.”
“Oh, Pyotr Petrovitch, you would not believe what a fright you have given
me,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna went on: “I’ve only seen him twice, but I thought
him terrible, terrible! I am convinced that he was the cause of Marfa Petrovna’s
death.”
“It’s impossible to be certain about that. I have precise information. I do not
dispute that he may have contributed to accelerate the course of events by the
moral influence, so to say, of the affront; but as to the general conduct and moral
characteristics of that personage, I am in agreement with you. I do not know
whether he is well off now, and precisely what Marfa Petrovna left him; this will
be known to me within a very short period; but no doubt here in Petersburg, if he
has any pecuniary resources, he will relapse at once into his old ways. He is the
most depraved, and abjectly vicious specimen of that class of men. I have
considerable reason to believe that Marfa Petrovna, who was so unfortunate as to
fall in love with him and to pay his debts eight years ago, was of service to him
also in another way. Solely by her exertions and sacrifices, a criminal charge,
involving an element of fantastic and homicidal brutality for which he might
well have been sentenced to Siberia, was hushed up. That’s the sort of man he is,
if you care to know.”
“Good heavens!” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna. Raskolnikov listened
attentively.
“Are you speaking the truth when you say that you have good evidence of
this?” Dounia asked sternly and emphatically.
“I only repeat what I was told in secret by Marfa Petrovna. I must observe that
from the legal point of view the case was far from clear. There was, and I believe
still is, living here a woman called Resslich, a foreigner, who lent small sums of
money at interest, and did other commissions, and with this woman Svidrigaïlov
had for a long while close and mysterious relations. She had a relation, a niece I
believe, living with her, a deaf and dumb girl of fifteen, or perhaps not more than
fourteen. Resslich hated this girl, and grudged her every crust; she used to beat
her mercilessly. One day the girl was found hanging in the garret. At the inquest
the verdict was suicide. After the usual proceedings the matter ended, but, later
on, information was given that the child had been... cruelly outraged by
Svidrigaïlov. It is true, this was not clearly established, the information was
given by another German woman of loose character whose word could not be
trusted; no statement was actually made to the police, thanks to Marfa Petrovna’s
money and exertions; it did not get beyond gossip. And yet the story is a very
significant one. You heard, no doubt, Avdotya Romanovna, when you were with
them the story of the servant Philip who died of ill treatment he received six
years ago, before the abolition of serfdom.”
 
