“Avdotya Romanovna,” Luzhin declared huffily, “your words are of too much
consequence to me; I will say more, they are offensive in view of the position I
have the honour to occupy in relation to you. To say nothing of your strange and
offensive setting me on a level with an impertinent boy, you admit the possibility
of breaking your promise to me. You say ‘you or he,’ showing thereby of how
little consequence I am in your eyes... I cannot let this pass considering the
relationship and... the obligations existing between us.”
“What!” cried Dounia, flushing. “I set your interest beside all that has hitherto
been most precious in my life, what has made up the whole of my life, and here
you are offended at my making too little account of you.”
Raskolnikov smiled sarcastically, Razumihin fidgeted, but Pyotr Petrovitch
did not accept the reproof; on the contrary, at every word he became more
persistent and irritable, as though he relished it.
“Love for the future partner of your life, for your husband, ought to outweigh
your love for your brother,” he pronounced sententiously, “and in any case I
cannot be put on the same level.... Although I said so emphatically that I would
not speak openly in your brother’s presence, nevertheless, I intend now to ask
your honoured mother for a necessary explanation on a point of great importance
closely affecting my dignity. Your son,” he turned to Pulcheria Alexandrovna,
“yesterday in the presence of Mr. Razsudkin (or... I think that’s it? excuse me I
have forgotten your surname,” he bowed politely to Razumihin) “insulted me by
misrepresenting the idea I expressed to you in a private conversation, drinking
coffee, that is, that marriage with a poor girl who has had experience of trouble
is more advantageous from the conjugal point of view than with one who has
lived in luxury, since it is more profitable for the moral character. Your son
intentionally exaggerated the significance of my words and made them
ridiculous, accusing me of malicious intentions, and, as far as I could see, relied
upon your correspondence with him. I shall consider myself happy, Pulcheria
Alexandrovna, if it is possible for you to convince me of an opposite conclusion,
and thereby considerately reassure me. Kindly let me know in what terms
precisely you repeated my words in your letter to Rodion Romanovitch.”
“I don’t remember,” faltered Pulcheria Alexandrovna. “I repeated them as I
understood them. I don’t know how Rodya repeated them to you, perhaps he
exaggerated.”
“He could not have exaggerated them, except at your instigation.”
“Pyotr Petrovitch,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna declared with dignity, “the proof
that Dounia and I did not take your words in a very bad sense is the fact that we
are here.”
“Good, mother,” said Dounia approvingly.
“Then this is my fault again,” said Luzhin, aggrieved. 
