He snatched up the bottle, which still contained a glassful of beer, and gulped
it down with relish, as though quenching a flame in his breast. But in another
minute the beer had gone to his head, and a faint and even pleasant shiver ran
down his spine. He lay down and pulled the quilt over him. His sick and
incoherent thoughts grew more and more disconnected, and soon a light,
pleasant drowsiness came upon him. With a sense of comfort he nestled his head
into the pillow, wrapped more closely about him the soft, wadded quilt which
had replaced the old, ragged greatcoat, sighed softly and sank into a deep, sound,
refreshing sleep.
He woke up, hearing someone come in. He opened his eyes and saw
Razumihin standing in the doorway, uncertain whether to come in or not.
Raskolnikov sat up quickly on the sofa and gazed at him, as though trying to
recall something.
“Ah, you are not asleep! Here I am! Nastasya, bring in the parcel!” Razumihin
shouted down the stairs. “You shall have the account directly.”
“What time is it?” asked Raskolnikov, looking round uneasily.
“Yes, you had a fine sleep, brother, it’s almost evening, it will be six o’clock
directly. You have slept more than six hours.”
“Good heavens! Have I?”
“And why not? It will do you good. What’s the hurry? A tryst, is it? We’ve all
time before us. I’ve been waiting for the last three hours for you; I’ve been up
twice and found you asleep. I’ve called on Zossimov twice; not at home, only
fancy! But no matter, he will turn up. And I’ve been out on my own business,
too. You know I’ve been moving to-day, moving with my uncle. I have an uncle
living with me now. But that’s no matter, to business. Give me the parcel,
Nastasya. We will open it directly. And how do you feel now, brother?”
“I am quite well, I am not ill. Razumihin, have you been here long?”
“I tell you I’ve been waiting for the last three hours.”
“No, before.”
“How do you mean?”
“How long have you been coming here?”
“Why I told you all about it this morning. Don’t you remember?”
Raskolnikov pondered. The morning seemed like a dream to him. He could
not remember alone, and looked inquiringly at Razumihin.
 
