“I knew it,” he muttered in confusion, “I thought so! That’s the worst of all!
Why, a stupid thing like this, the most trivial detail might spoil the whole plan.
Yes, my hat is too noticeable.... It looks absurd and that makes it noticeable....
With my rags I ought to wear a cap, any sort of old pancake, but not this
grotesque thing. Nobody wears such a hat, it would be noticed a mile off, it
would be remembered.... What matters is that people would remember it, and
that would give them a clue. For this business one should be as little conspicuous
as possible.... Trifles, trifles are what matter! Why, it’s just such trifles that
always ruin everything....”
He had not far to go; he knew indeed how many steps it was from the gate of
his lodging house: exactly seven hundred and thirty. He had counted them once
when he had been lost in dreams. At the time he had put no faith in those dreams
and was only tantalising himself by their hideous but daring recklessness. Now, a
month later, he had begun to look upon them differently, and, in spite of the
monologues in which he jeered at his own impotence and indecision, he had
involuntarily come to regard this “hideous” dream as an exploit to be attempted,
although he still did not realise this himself. He was positively going now for a
“rehearsal” of his project, and at every step his excitement grew more and more
violent.
With a sinking heart and a nervous tremor, he went up to a huge house which
on one side looked on to the canal, and on the other into the street. This house
was let out in tiny tenements and was inhabited by working people of all kinds—
tailors, locksmiths, cooks, Germans of sorts, girls picking up a living as best they
could, petty clerks, etc. There was a continual coming and going through the two
gates and in the two courtyards of the house. Three or four door-keepers were
employed on the building. The young man was very glad to meet none of them,
and at once slipped unnoticed through the door on the right, and up the staircase.
It was a back staircase, dark and narrow, but he was familiar with it already, and
knew his way, and he liked all these surroundings: in such darkness even the
most inquisitive eyes were not to be dreaded 
