 “Well, Pyotr Petrovitch, you keep blaming Rodion, but you yourself have just
written what was false about him,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna added, gaining
courage.
“I don’t remember writing anything false.”
“You wrote,” Raskolnikov said sharply, not turning to Luzhin, “that I gave
money yesterday not to the widow of the man who was killed, as was the fact,
but to his daughter (whom I had never seen till yesterday). You wrote this to
make dissension between me and my family, and for that object added coarse
expressions about the conduct of a girl whom you don’t know. All that is mean
slander.”
“Excuse me, sir,” said Luzhin, quivering with fury. “I enlarged upon your
qualities and conduct in my letter solely in response to your sister’s and mother’s
inquiries, how I found you, and what impression you made on me. As for what
you’ve alluded to in my letter, be so good as to point out one word of falsehood,
show, that is, that you didn’t throw away your money, and that there are not
worthless persons in that family, however unfortunate.”
“To my thinking, you, with all your virtues, are not worth the little finger of
that unfortunate girl at whom you throw stones.”
“Would you go so far then as to let her associate with your mother and sister?”
“I have done so already, if you care to know. I made her sit down to-day with
mother and Dounia.”
“Rodya!” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna. Dounia crimsoned, Razumihin
knitted his brows. Luzhin smiled with lofty sarcasm.
“You may see for yourself, Avdotya Romanovna,” he said, “whether it is
possible for us to agree. I hope now that this question is at an end, once and for
all. I will withdraw, that I may not hinder the pleasures of family intimacy, and
the discussion of secrets.” He got up from his chair and took his hat. “But in
withdrawing, I venture to request that for the future I may be spared similar
meetings, and, so to say, compromises. I appeal particularly to you, honoured
Pulcheria Alexandrovna, on this subject, the more as my letter was addressed to
you and to no one else.”
Pulcheria Alexandrovna was a little offended.
