Sonia hastened to give her Pyotr Petrovitch’s apologies, trying to speak loud
enough for everyone to hear and carefully choosing the most respectful phrases
which she attributed to Pyotr Petrovitch. She added that Pyotr Petrovitch had
particularly told her to say that, as soon as he possibly could, he would come
immediately to discuss business alone with her and to consider what could be
done for her, etc., etc.
Sonia knew that this would comfort Katerina Ivanovna, would flatter her and
gratify her pride. She sat down beside Raskolnikov; she made him a hurried
bow, glancing curiously at him. But for the rest of the time she seemed to avoid
looking at him or speaking to him. She seemed absent-minded, though she kept
looking at Katerina Ivanovna, trying to please her. Neither she nor Katerina
Ivanovna had been able to get mourning; Sonia was wearing dark brown, and
Katerina Ivanovna had on her only dress, a dark striped cotton one.
The message from Pyotr Petrovitch was very successful. Listening to Sonia
with dignity, Katerina Ivanovna inquired with equal dignity how Pyotr
Petrovitch was, then at once whispered almost aloud to Raskolnikov that it
certainly would have been strange for a man of Pyotr Petrovitch’s position and
standing to find himself in such “extraordinary company,” in spite of his
devotion to her family and his old friendship with her father.
“That’s why I am so grateful to you, Rodion Romanovitch, that you have not
disdained my hospitality, even in such surroundings,” she added almost aloud.
“But I am sure that it was only your special affection for my poor husband that
has made you keep your promise.”
Then once more with pride and dignity she scanned her visitors, and suddenly
inquired aloud across the table of the deaf man: “Wouldn’t he have some more
meat, and had he been given some wine?” The old man made no answer and for
a long while could not understand what he was asked, though his neighbours
amused themselves by poking and shaking him. He simply gazed about him with
his mouth open, which only increased the general mirth.
“What an imbecile! Look, look! Why was he brought? But as to Pyotr
Petrovitch, I always had confidence in him,” Katerina Ivanovna continued, “and,
of course, he is not like...” with an extremely stern face she addressed Amalia
Ivanovna so sharply and loudly that the latter was quite disconcerted, “not like
your dressed up draggletails whom my father would not have taken as cooks into
his kitchen, and my late husband would have done them honour if he had invited
them in the goodness of his heart.”