“Me—afraid? Afraid of you? You have rather to be afraid of me, cher ami.
But what nonsense.... I’ve drunk too much though, I see that. I was almost
saying too much again. Damn the wine! Hi! there, water!”
He snatched up the champagne bottle and flung it without ceremony out of the
window. Philip brought the water.
“That’s all nonsense!” said Svidrigaïlov, wetting a towel and putting it to his
head. “But I can answer you in one word and annihilate all your suspicions. Do
you know that I am going to get married?”
“You told me so before.”
“Did I? I’ve forgotten. But I couldn’t have told you so for certain for I had not
even seen my betrothed; I only meant to. But now I really have a betrothed and
it’s a settled thing, and if it weren’t that I have business that can’t be put off, I
would have taken you to see them at once, for I should like to ask your advice.
Ach, hang it, only ten minutes left! See, look at the watch. But I must tell you,
for it’s an interesting story, my marriage, in its own way. Where are you off to?
Going again?”
“No, I’m not going away now.”
“Not at all? We shall see. I’ll take you there, I’ll show you my betrothed, only
not now. For you’ll soon have to be off. You have to go to the right and I to the
left. Do you know that Madame Resslich, the woman I am lodging with now,
eh? I know what you’re thinking, that she’s the woman whose girl they say
drowned herself in the winter. Come, are you listening? She arranged it all for
me. You’re bored, she said, you want something to fill up your time. For, you
know, I am a gloomy, depressed person. Do you think I’m light-hearted? No, I’m
gloomy. I do no harm, but sit in a corner without speaking a word for three days
at a time. And that Resslich is a sly hussy, I tell you. I know what she has got in
her mind; she thinks I shall get sick of it, abandon my wife and depart, and she’ll
get hold of her and make a profit out of her—in our class, of course, or higher.
She told me the father was a broken-down retired official, who has been sitting
in a chair for the last three years with his legs paralysed. The mamma, she said,
was a sensible woman. There is a son serving in the provinces, but he doesn’t
help; there is a daughter, who is married, but she doesn’t visit them. And they’ve
two little nephews on their hands, as though their own children were not enough,
and they’ve taken from school their youngest daughter, a girl who’ll be sixteen
in another month, so that then she can be married.