Later on, when he recalled that time and all that happened to him during those
days, minute by minute, point by point, he was superstitiously impressed by one
circumstance, which, though in itself not very exceptional, always seemed to
him afterwards the predestined turning-point of his fate. He could never
understand and explain to himself why, when he was tired and worn out, when it
would have been more convenient for him to go home by the shortest and most
direct way, he had returned by the Hay Market where he had no need to go. It
was obviously and quite unnecessarily out of his way, though not much so. It is
true that it happened to him dozens of times to return home without noticing
what streets he passed through. But why, he was always asking himself, why had
such an important, such a decisive and at the same time such an absolutely
chance meeting happened in the Hay Market (where he had moreover no reason
to go) at the very hour, the very minute of his life when he was just in the very
mood and in the very circumstances in which that meeting was able to exert the
gravest and most decisive influence on his whole destiny? As though it had been
lying in wait for him on purpose!
It was about nine o’clock when he crossed the Hay Market. At the tables and
the barrows, at the booths and the shops, all the market people were closing their
establishments or clearing away and packing up their wares and, like their
customers, were going home. Rag pickers and costermongers of all kinds were
crowding round the taverns in the dirty and stinking courtyards of the Hay
Market. Raskolnikov particularly liked this place and the neighbouring alleys,
when he wandered aimlessly in the streets. Here his rags did not attract
contemptuous attention, and one could walk about in any attire without
scandalising people. At the corner of an alley a huckster and his wife had two
tables set out with tapes, thread, cotton handkerchiefs, etc. They, too, had got up
to go home, but were lingering in conversation with a friend, who had just come
up to them. This friend was Lizaveta Ivanovna, or, as everyone called her,
Lizaveta, the younger sister of the old pawnbroker, Alyona Ivanovna, whom
Raskolnikov had visited the previous day to pawn his watch and make his
experiment.... He already knew all about Lizaveta and she knew him a little too.
She was a single woman of about thirty-five, tall, clumsy, timid, submissive and
almost idiotic. She was a complete slave and went in fear and trembling of her
sister, who made her work day and night, and even beat her. She was standing
with a bundle before the huckster and his wife, listening earnestly and
doubtfully. They were talking of something with special warmth. The moment
Raskolnikov caught sight of her, he was overcome by a strange sensation as it
were of intense astonishment, though there was nothing astonishing about this
meeting 
