During the conversation, Raskolnikov watched her carefully. She had a thin,
very thin, pale little face, rather irregular and angular, with a sharp little nose and
chin. She could not have been called pretty, but her blue eyes were so clear, and
when they lighted up, there was such a kindliness and simplicity in her
expression that one could not help being attracted. Her face, and her whole
figure indeed, had another peculiar characteristic. In spite of her eighteen years,
she looked almost a little girl—almost a child. And in some of her gestures, this
childishness seemed almost absurd.
“But has Katerina Ivanovna been able to manage with such small means?
Does she even mean to have a funeral lunch?” Raskolnikov asked, persistently
keeping up the conversation.
“The coffin will be plain, of course... and everything will be plain, so it won’t
cost much. Katerina Ivanovna and I have reckoned it all out, so that there will be
enough left... and Katerina Ivanovna was very anxious it should be so. You know
one can’t... it’s a comfort to her... she is like that, you know....”
“I understand, I understand... of course... why do you look at my room like
that? My mother has just said it is like a tomb.”
“You gave us everything yesterday,” Sonia said suddenly, in reply, in a loud
rapid whisper; and again she looked down in confusion. Her lips and chin were
trembling once more. She had been struck at once by Raskolnikov’s poor
surroundings, and now these words broke out spontaneously. A silence followed.
There was a light in Dounia’s eyes, and even Pulcheria Alexandrovna looked
kindly at Sonia.
“Rodya,” she said, getting up, “we shall have dinner together, of course.
Come, Dounia.... And you, Rodya, had better go for a little walk, and then rest
and lie down before you come to see us.... I am afraid we have exhausted you....”
“Yes, yes, I’ll come,” he answered, getting up fussily. “But I have something
to see to.”
“But surely you will have dinner together?” cried Razumihin, looking in
surprise at Raskolnikov. “What do you mean?”
“Yes, yes, I am coming... of course, of course! And you stay a minute. You do
not want him just now, do you, mother? Or perhaps I am taking him from you?”
“Oh, no, no. And will you, Dmitri Prokofitch, do us the favour of dining with
us?”
“Please do,” added Dounia. 
