No sooner had she left the room than the sick man flung off the bedclothes
and leapt out of bed like a madman. With burning, twitching impatience he had
waited for them to be gone so that he might set to work. But to what work? Now,
as though to spite him, it eluded him.
“Good God, only tell me one thing: do they know of it yet or not? What if
they know it and are only pretending, mocking me while I am laid up, and then
they will come in and tell me that it’s been discovered long ago and that they
have only... What am I to do now? That’s what I’ve forgotten, as though on
purpose; forgotten it all at once, I remembered a minute ago.”
He stood in the middle of the room and gazed in miserable bewilderment
about him; he walked to the door, opened it, listened; but that was not what he
wanted. Suddenly, as though recalling something, he rushed to the corner where
there was a hole under the paper, began examining it, put his hand into the hole,
fumbled—but that was not it. He went to the stove, opened it and began
rummaging in the ashes; the frayed edges of his trousers and the rags cut off his
pocket were lying there just as he had thrown them. No one had looked, then!
Then he remembered the sock about which Razumihin had just been telling him.
Yes, there it lay on the sofa under the quilt, but it was so covered with dust and
grime that Zametov could not have seen anything on it.
“Bah, Zametov! The police office! And why am I sent for to the police office?
Where’s the notice? Bah! I am mixing it up; that was then. I looked at my sock
then, too, but now... now I have been ill. But what did Zametov come for? Why
did Razumihin bring him?” he muttered, helplessly sitting on the sofa again.
“What does it mean? Am I still in delirium, or is it real? I believe it is real.... Ah,
I remember; I must escape! Make haste to escape. Yes, I must, I must escape!
Yes... but where? And where are my clothes? I’ve no boots. They’ve taken them
away! They’ve hidden them! I understand! Ah, here is my coat—they passed
that over! And here is money on the table, thank God! And here’s the I O U... I’ll
take the money and go and take another lodging. They won’t find me!... Yes, but
the address bureau? They’ll find me, Razumihin will find me. Better escape
altogether... far away... to America, and let them do their worst! And take the I O
U... it would be of use there.... What else shall I take? They think I am ill! They
don’t know that I can walk, ha-ha-ha! I could see by their eyes that they know all
about it! If only I could get downstairs! And what if they have set a watch there
—policemen! What’s this tea? Ah, and here is beer left, half a bottle, cold!” 
