But what could they have in common? Their very evil-doing could not be of
the same kind. The man, moreover, was very unpleasant, evidently depraved,
undoubtedly cunning and deceitful, possibly malignant. Such stories were told
about him. It is true he was befriending Katerina Ivanovna’s children, but who
could tell with what motive and what it meant? The man always had some
design, some project.
There was another thought which had been continually hovering of late about
Raskolnikov’s mind, and causing him great uneasiness. It was so painful that he
made distinct efforts to get rid of it. He sometimes thought that Svidrigaïlov was
dogging his footsteps. Svidrigaïlov had found out his secret and had had designs
on Dounia. What if he had them still? Wasn’t it practically certain that he had?
And what if, having learnt his secret and so having gained power over him, he
were to use it as a weapon against Dounia?
This idea sometimes even tormented his dreams, but it had never presented
itself so vividly to him as on his way to Svidrigaïlov. The very thought moved
him to gloomy rage. To begin with, this would transform everything, even his
own position; he would have at once to confess his secret to Dounia. Would he
have to give himself up perhaps to prevent Dounia from taking some rash step?
The letter? This morning Dounia had received a letter. From whom could she get
letters in Petersburg? Luzhin, perhaps? It’s true Razumihin was there to protect
her, but Razumihin knew nothing of the position. Perhaps it was his duty to tell
Razumihin? He thought of it with repugnance.
In any case he must see Svidrigaïlov as soon as possible, he decided finally.
Thank God, the details of the interview were of little consequence, if only he
could get at the root of the matter; but if Svidrigaïlov were capable... if he were
intriguing against Dounia—then...
Raskolnikov was so exhausted by what he had passed through that month that
he could only decide such questions in one way; “then I shall kill him,” he
thought in cold despair.