He seemed to be approaching cautiously. He did not go on to the bridge, but
stood aside on the pavement, doing all he could to avoid Raskolnikov’s seeing
him. He had observed Dounia for some time and had been making signs to her.
She fancied he was signalling to beg her not to speak to her brother, but to come
to him.
That was what Dounia did. She stole by her brother and went up to
Svidrigaïlov.
“Let us make haste away,” Svidrigaïlov whispered to her, “I don’t want
Rodion Romanovitch to know of our meeting. I must tell you I’ve been sitting
with him in the restaurant close by, where he looked me up and I had great
difficulty in getting rid of him. He has somehow heard of my letter to you and
suspects something. It wasn’t you who told him, of course, but if not you, who
then?”
“Well, we’ve turned the corner now,” Dounia interrupted, “and my brother
won’t see us. I have to tell you that I am going no further with you. Speak to me
here. You can tell it all in the street.”
“In the first place, I can’t say it in the street; secondly, you must hear Sofya
Semyonovna too; and, thirdly, I will show you some papers.... Oh well, if you
won’t agree to come with me, I shall refuse to give any explanation and go away
at once. But I beg you not to forget that a very curious secret of your beloved
brother’s is entirely in my keeping.”
Dounia stood still, hesitating, and looked at Svidrigaïlov with searching eyes.
“What are you afraid of?” he observed quietly. “The town is not the country.
And even in the country you did me more harm than I did you.”
“Have you prepared Sofya Semyonovna?”
“No, I have not said a word to her and am not quite certain whether she is at
home now. But most likely she is. She has buried her stepmother to-day: she is
not likely to go visiting on such a day. For the time I don’t want to speak to
anyone about it and I half regret having spoken to you. The slightest indiscretion
is as bad as betrayal in a thing like this. I live there in that house, we are coming
to it. That’s the porter of our house—he knows me very well; you see, he’s
bowing; he sees I’m coming with a lady and no doubt he has noticed your face
already and you will be glad of that if you are afraid of me and suspicious.
Excuse my putting things so coarsely. I haven’t a flat to myself; Sofya
Semyonovna’s room is next to mine—she lodges in the next flat. The whole
floor is let out in lodgings. Why are you frightened like a child? Am I really so
terrible?”