“That was five weeks ago, sir. Yes.... As soon as Katerina Ivanovna and Sonia
heard of it, mercy on us, it was as though I stepped into the kingdom of Heaven.
It used to be: you can lie like a beast, nothing but abuse. Now they were walking
on tiptoe, hushing the children. ‘Semyon Zaharovitch is tired with his work at
the office, he is resting, shh!’ They made me coffee before I went to work and
boiled cream for me! They began to get real cream for me, do you hear that?
And how they managed to get together the money for a decent outfit—eleven
roubles, fifty copecks, I can’t guess. Boots, cotton shirt-fronts—most
magnificent, a uniform, they got up all in splendid style, for eleven roubles and a
half. The first morning I came back from the office I found Katerina Ivanovna
had cooked two courses for dinner—soup and salt meat with horse radish—
which we had never dreamed of till then. She had not any dresses... none at all,
but she got herself up as though she were going on a visit; and not that she’d
anything to do it with, she smartened herself up with nothing at all, she’d done
her hair nicely, put on a clean collar of some sort, cuffs, and there she was, quite
a different person, she was younger and better looking. Sonia, my little darling,
had only helped with money ‘for the time,’ she said, ‘it won’t do for me to come
and see you too often. After dark maybe when no one can see.’ Do you hear, do
you hear? I lay down for a nap after dinner and what do you think: though
Katerina Ivanovna had quarrelled to the last degree with our landlady Amalia
Fyodorovna only a week before, she could not resist then asking her in to coffee.
For two hours they were sitting, whispering together. ‘Semyon Zaharovitch is in
the service again, now, and receiving a salary,’ says she, ‘and he went himself to
his excellency and his excellency himself came out to him, made all the others
wait and led Semyon Zaharovitch by the hand before everybody into his study.’
Do you hear, do you hear? ‘To be sure,’ says he, ‘Semyon Zaharovitch,
remembering your past services,’says he, ‘and in spite of your propensity to that
foolish weakness, since you promise now and since moreover we’ve got on
badly without you,’ (do you hear, do you hear;) ‘and so,’ says he, ‘I rely now on
your word as a gentleman.’ And all that, let me tell you, she has simply made up
for herself, and not simply out of wantonness, for the sake of bragging; no, she
believes it all herself, she amuses herself with her own fancies, upon my word
she does! And I don’t blame her for it, no, I don’t blame her!... Six days ago
when I brought her my first earnings in full—twenty-three roubles forty copecks
altogether—she called me her poppet: ‘poppet,’ said she, ‘my little poppet.’ And
when we were by ourselves, you understand? You would not think me a beauty,
you would not think much of me as a husband, would you?... Well, she pinched
my cheek, ‘my little poppet,’said she.”
Marmeladov broke off, tried to smile, but suddenly his chin began to twitch.
He controlled himself however. The tavern, the degraded appearance of the man,
the five nights in the hay barge, and the pot of spirits, and yet this poignant love
for his wife and children bewildered his listener. Raskolnikov listened intently
but with a sick sensation. He felt vexed that he had come here.
 
