Andrey Semyonovitch was an anæmic, scrofulous little man, with strangely
flaxen mutton-chop whiskers of which he was very proud. He was a clerk and
had almost always something wrong with his eyes. He was rather soft-hearted,
but self-confident and sometimes extremely conceited in speech, which had an
absurd effect, incongruous with his little figure. He was one of the lodgers most
respected by Amalia Ivanovna, for he did not get drunk and paid regularly for
his lodgings. Andrey Semyonovitch really was rather stupid; he attached himself
to the cause of progress and “our younger generation” from enthusiasm. He was
one of the numerous and varied legion of dullards, of half-animate abortions,
conceited, half-educated coxcombs, who attach themselves to the idea most in
fashion only to vulgarise it and who caricature every cause they serve, however
sincerely.
Though Lebeziatnikov was so good-natured, he, too, was beginning to dislike
Pyotr Petrovitch. This happened on both sides unconsciously. However simple
Andrey Semyonovitch might be, he began to see that Pyotr Petrovitch was
duping him and secretly despising him, and that “he was not the right sort of
man.” He had tried expounding to him the system of Fourier and the Darwinian
theory, but of late Pyotr Petrovitch began to listen too sarcastically and even to
be rude. The fact was he had begun instinctively to guess that Lebeziatnikov was
not merely a commonplace simpleton, but, perhaps, a liar, too, and that he had
no connections of any consequence even in his own circle, but had simply
picked things up third-hand; and that very likely he did not even know much
about his own work of propaganda, for he was in too great a muddle. A fine
person he would be to show anyone up! It must be noted, by the way, that Pyotr
Petrovitch had during those ten days eagerly accepted the strangest praise from
Andrey Semyonovitch; he had not protested, for instance, when Andrey
Semyonovitch belauded him for being ready to contribute to the establishment of
the new “commune,” or to abstain from christening his future children, or to
acquiesce if Dounia were to take a lover a month after marriage, and so on. Pyotr
Petrovitch so enjoyed hearing his own praises that he did not disdain even such
virtues when they were attributed to him.