“What folly to trouble myself,” he decided suddenly with an oppressive
feeling of annoyance. “What idiocy!” In vexation he took up the candle to go
and look for the ragged attendant again and make haste to go away. “Damn the
child!” he thought as he opened the door, but he turned again to see whether the
child was asleep. He raised the blanket carefully. The child was sleeping
soundly, she had got warm under the blanket, and her pale cheeks were flushed.
But strange to say that flush seemed brighter and coarser than the rosy cheeks of
childhood. “It’s a flush of fever,” thought Svidrigaïlov. It was like the flush from
drinking, as though she had been given a full glass to drink. Her crimson lips
were hot and glowing; but what was this? He suddenly fancied that her long
black eyelashes were quivering, as though the lids were opening and a sly crafty
eye peeped out with an unchildlike wink, as though the little girl were not asleep,
but pretending. Yes, it was so. Her lips parted in a smile. The corners of her
mouth quivered, as though she were trying to control them. But now she quite
gave up all effort, now it was a grin, a broad grin; there was something
shameless, provocative in that quite unchildish face; it was depravity, it was the
face of a harlot, the shameless face of a French harlot. Now both eyes opened
wide; they turned a glowing, shameless glance upon him; they laughed, invited
him.... There was something infinitely hideous and shocking in that laugh, in
those eyes, in such nastiness in the face of a child. “What, at five years old?”
Svidrigaïlov muttered in genuine horror. “What does it mean?” And now she
turned to him, her little face all aglow, holding out her arms.... “Accursed child!”
Svidrigaïlov cried, raising his hand to strike her, but at that moment he woke up.
He was in the same bed, still wrapped in the blanket. The candle had not been
lighted, and daylight was streaming in at the windows.
“I’ve had nightmare all night!” He got up angrily, feeling utterly shattered; his
bones ached. There was a thick mist outside and he could see nothing. It was
nearly five. He had overslept himself! He got up, put on his still damp jacket and
overcoat. Feeling the revolver in his pocket, he took it out and then he sat down,
took a notebook out of his pocket and in the most conspicuous place on the title
page wrote a few lines in large letters. Reading them over, he sank into thought
with his elbows on the table. The revolver and the notebook lay beside him.
Some flies woke up and settled on the untouched veal, which was still on the
table. He stared at them and at last with his free right hand began trying to catch
one. He tried till he was tired, but could not catch it. At last, realising that he was
engaged in this interesting pursuit, he started, got up and walked resolutely out
of the room. A minute later he was in the street.