Raskolnikov started so that Porfiry Petrovitch could not fail to perceive it.
“You are lying all the while,” he cried, “I don’t know your object, but you are
lying. You did not speak like that just now and I cannot be mistaken!”
“I am lying?” Porfiry repeated, apparently incensed, but preserving a goodhumoured
and ironical face, as though he were not in the least concerned at
Raskolnikov’s opinion of him. “I am lying... but how did I treat you just now, I,
the examining lawyer? Prompting you and giving you every means for your
defence; illness, I said, delirium, injury, melancholy and the police officers and
all the rest of it? Ah! He-he-he! Though, indeed, all those psychological means
of defence are not very reliable and cut both ways: illness, delirium, I don’t
remember—that’s all right, but why, my good sir, in your illness and in your
delirium were you haunted by just those delusions and not by any others? There
may have been others, eh? He-he-he!”
Raskolnikov looked haughtily and contemptuously at him.
“Briefly,” he said loudly and imperiously, rising to his feet and in so doing
pushing Porfiry back a little, “briefly, I want to know, do you acknowledge me
perfectly free from suspicion or not? Tell me, Porfiry Petrovitch, tell me once for
all and make haste!”
“What a business I’m having with you!” cried Porfiry with a perfectly goodhumoured,
sly and composed face. “And why do you want to know, why do you
want to know so much, since they haven’t begun to worry you? Why, you are
like a child asking for matches! And why are you so uneasy? Why do you force
yourself upon us, eh? He-he-he!”
“I repeat,” Raskolnikov cried furiously, “that I can’t put up with it!”
“With what? Uncertainty?” interrupted Porfiry.
“Don’t jeer at me! I won’t have it! I tell you I won’t have it. I can’t and I
won’t, do you hear, do you hear?” he shouted, bringing his fist down on the table
again.
“Hush! Hush! They’ll overhear! I warn you seriously, take care of yourself. I
am not joking,” Porfiry whispered, but this time there was not the look of old
womanish good nature and alarm in his face. Now he was peremptory, stern,
frowning and for once laying aside all mystification.