“Perhaps it was one of these future Napoleons who did for Alyona Ivanovna
last week?” Zametov blurted out from the corner.
Raskolnikov did not speak, but looked firmly and intently at Porfiry.
Razumihin was scowling gloomily. He seemed before this to be noticing
something. He looked angrily around. There was a minute of gloomy silence.
Raskolnikov turned to go.
“Are you going already?” Porfiry said amiably, holding out his hand with
excessive politeness. “Very, very glad of your acquaintance. As for your request,
have no uneasiness, write just as I told you, or, better still, come to me there
yourself in a day or two... to-morrow, indeed. I shall be there at eleven o’clock
for certain. We’ll arrange it all; we’ll have a talk. As one of the last to be there,
you might perhaps be able to tell us something,” he added with a most goodnatured expression.
“You want to cross-examine me officially in due form?” Raskolnikov asked
sharply.
“Oh, why? That’s not necessary for the present. You misunderstand me. I lose
no opportunity, you see, and... I’ve talked with all who had pledges.... I obtained
evidence from some of them, and you are the last.... Yes, by the way,” he cried,
seemingly suddenly delighted, “I just remember, what was I thinking of?” he
turned to Razumihin, “you were talking my ears off about that Nikolay... of
course, I know, I know very well,” he turned to Raskolnikov, “that the fellow is
innocent, but what is one to do? We had to trouble Dmitri too.... This is the
point, this is all: when you went up the stairs it was past seven, wasn’t it?”
“Yes,” answered Raskolnikov, with an unpleasant sensation at the very
moment he spoke that he need not have said it.
“Then when you went upstairs between seven and eight, didn’t you see in a
flat that stood open on a second storey, do you remember? two workmen or at
least one of them? They were painting there, didn’t you notice them? It’s very,
very important for them.”
“Painters? No, I didn’t see them,” Raskolnikov answered slowly, as though
ransacking his memory, while at the same instant he was racking every nerve,
almost swooning with anxiety to conjecture as quickly as possible where the trap
lay and not to overlook anything. “No, I didn’t see them, and I don’t think I
noticed a flat like that open.... But on the fourth storey” (he had mastered the
trap now and was triumphant) “I remember now that someone was moving out
of the flat opposite Alyona Ivanovna’s.... I remember... I remember it clearly.
Some porters were carrying out a sofa and they squeezed me against the wall. 
