Sonia did not think it at all funny.
“You had better tell me straight out... without examples,” she begged, still
more timidly and scarcely audibly.
He turned to her, looked sadly at her and took her hands.
“You are right again, Sonia. Of course that’s all nonsense, it’s almost all talk!
You see, you know of course that my mother has scarcely anything, my sister
happened to have a good education and was condemned to drudge as a
governess. All their hopes were centered on me. I was a student, but I couldn’t
keep myself at the university and was forced for a time to leave it. Even if I had
lingered on like that, in ten or twelve years I might (with luck) hope to be some
sort of teacher or clerk with a salary of a thousand roubles” (he repeated it as
though it were a lesson) “and by that time my mother would be worn out with
grief and anxiety and I could not succeed in keeping her in comfort while my
sister... well, my sister might well have fared worse! And it’s a hard thing to pass
everything by all one’s life, to turn one’s back upon everything, to forget one’s
mother and decorously accept the insults inflicted on one’s sister. Why should
one? When one has buried them to burden oneself with others—wife and
children—and to leave them again without a farthing? So I resolved to gain
possession of the old woman’s money and to use it for my first years without
worrying my mother, to keep myself at the university and for a little while after
leaving it—and to do this all on a broad, thorough scale, so as to build up a
completely new career and enter upon a new life of independence.... Well...
that’s all.... Well, of course in killing the old woman I did wrong.... Well, that’s
enough.”
He struggled to the end of his speech in exhaustion and let his head sink.
“Oh, that’s not it, that’s not it,” Sonia cried in distress. “How could one... no,
that’s not right, not right.”
“You see yourself that it’s not right. But I’ve spoken truly, it’s the truth.”
“As though that could be the truth! Good God!”
“I’ve only killed a louse, Sonia, a useless, loathsome, harmful creature.”
“A human being—a louse!”
“I too know it wasn’t a louse,” he answered, looking strangely at her. “But I
am talking nonsense, Sonia,” he added. “I’ve been talking nonsense a long
time.... That’s not it, you are right there. There were quite, quite other causes for
it! I haven’t talked to anyone for so long, Sonia.... My head aches dreadfully
now.”