“I used to talk a great deal about it to her, only to her,” he said thoughtfully.
“To her heart I confided much of what has since been so hideously realised.
Don’t be uneasy,” he returned to Dounia, “she was as much opposed to it as you,
and I am glad that she is gone. The great point is that everything now is going to
be different, is going to be broken in two,” he cried, suddenly returning to his
dejection. “Everything, everything, and am I prepared for it? Do I want it
myself? They say it is necessary for me to suffer! What’s the object of these
senseless sufferings? shall I know any better what they are for, when I am
crushed by hardships and idiocy, and weak as an old man after twenty years’
penal servitude? And what shall I have to live for then? Why am I consenting to
that life now? Oh, I knew I was contemptible when I stood looking at the Neva
at daybreak to-day!”
At last they both went out. It was hard for Dounia, but she loved him. She
walked away, but after going fifty paces she turned round to look at him again.
He was still in sight. At the corner he too turned and for the last time their eyes
met; but noticing that she was looking at him, he motioned her away with
impatience and even vexation, and turned the corner abruptly.
“I am wicked, I see that,” he thought to himself, feeling ashamed a moment
later of his angry gesture to Dounia. “But why are they so fond of me if I don’t
deserve it? Oh, if only I were alone and no one loved me and I too had never
loved anyone! Nothing of all this would have happened. But I wonder shall I in
those fifteen or twenty years grow so meek that I shall humble myself before
people and whimper at every word that I am a criminal? Yes, that’s it, that’s it,
that’s what they are sending me there for, that’s what they want. Look at them
running to and fro about the streets, every one of them a scoundrel and a
criminal at heart and, worse still, an idiot. But try to get me off and they’d be
wild with righteous indignation. Oh, how I hate them all!”