And if only fate would have sent him repentance—burning repentance that
would have torn his heart and robbed him of sleep, that repentance, the awful
agony of which brings visions of hanging or drowning! Oh, he would have been
glad of it! Tears and agonies would at least have been life. But he did not repent
of his crime.
At least he might have found relief in raging at his stupidity, as he had raged at
the grotesque blunders that had brought him to prison. But now in prison, in
freedom, he thought over and criticised all his actions again and by no means
found them so blundering and so grotesque as they had seemed at the fatal time.
“In what way,” he asked himself, “was my theory stupider than others that
have swarmed and clashed from the beginning of the world? One has only to
look at the thing quite independently, broadly, and uninfluenced by
commonplace ideas, and my idea will by no means seem so... strange. Oh,
sceptics and halfpenny philosophers, why do you halt half-way!
“Why does my action strike them as so horrible?” he said to himself. “Is it
because it was a crime? What is meant by crime? My conscience is at rest. Of
course, it was a legal crime, of course, the letter of the law was broken and blood
was shed. Well, punish me for the letter of the law... and that’s enough. Of
course, in that case many of the benefactors of mankind who snatched power for
themselves instead of inheriting it ought to have been punished at their first
steps. But those men succeeded and so they were right, and I didn’t, and so I had
no right to have taken that step.”
It was only in that that he recognised his criminality, only in the fact that he
had been unsuccessful and had confessed it.
He suffered too from the question: why had he not killed himself? Why had he
stood looking at the river and preferred to confess? Was the desire to live so
strong and was it so hard to overcome it? Had not Svidrigaïlov overcome it,
although he was afraid of death?
In misery he asked himself this question, and could not understand that, at the
very time he had been standing looking into the river, he had perhaps been dimly
conscious of the fundamental falsity in himself and his convictions. He didn’t
understand that that consciousness might be the promise of a future crisis, of a
new view of life and of his future resurrection.