He pointed to a little table in the corner where the remnants of a terriblelooking
beef-steak and potatoes lay on a tin dish.
“Have you dined, by the way? I’ve had something and want nothing more. I
don’t drink, for instance, at all. Except for champagne I never touch anything,
and not more than a glass of that all the evening, and even that is enough to
make my head ache. I ordered it just now to wind myself up, for I am just going
off somewhere and you see me in a peculiar state of mind. That was why I hid
myself just now like a schoolboy, for I was afraid you would hinder me. But I
believe,” he pulled out his watch, “I can spend an hour with you. It’s half-past
four now. If only I’d been something, a landowner, a father, a cavalry officer, a
photographer, a journalist... I am nothing, no specialty, and sometimes I am
positively bored. I really thought you would tell me something new.”
“But what are you, and why have you come here?”
“What am I? You know, a gentleman, I served for two years in the cavalry,
then I knocked about here in Petersburg, then I married Marfa Petrovna and
lived in the country. There you have my biography!”
“You are a gambler, I believe?”
“No, a poor sort of gambler. A card-sharper—not a gambler.”
“You have been a card-sharper then?”
“Yes, I’ve been a card-sharper too.”
“Didn’t you get thrashed sometimes?”
“It did happen. Why?”
“Why, you might have challenged them... altogether it must have been lively.”
“I won’t contradict you, and besides I am no hand at philosophy. I confess that
I hastened here for the sake of the women.”
“As soon as you buried Marfa Petrovna?”
“Quite so,” Svidrigaïlov smiled with engaging candour. “What of it? You
seem to find something wrong in my speaking like that about women?”
“You ask whether I find anything wrong in vice?”
“Vice! Oh, that’s what you are after! But I’ll answer you in order, first about
women in general; you know I am fond of talking. Tell me, what should I
restrain myself for? Why should I give up women, since I have a passion for
them? It’s an occupation, anyway.”
“So you hope for nothing here but vice?”