Raskolnikov did not sit down, but he felt unwilling to leave her, and stood
facing her in perplexity. This boulevard was never much frequented; and now, at
two o’clock, in the stifling heat, it was quite deserted. And yet on the further side
of the boulevard, about fifteen paces away, a gentleman was standing on the
edge of the pavement. He, too, would apparently have liked to approach the girl
with some object of his own. He, too, had probably seen her in the distance and
had followed her, but found Raskolnikov in his way. He looked angrily at him,
though he tried to escape his notice, and stood impatiently biding his time, till
the unwelcome man in rags should have moved away. His intentions were
unmistakable. The gentleman was a plump, thickly-set man, about thirty,
fashionably dressed, with a high colour, red lips and moustaches. Raskolnikov
felt furious; he had a sudden longing to insult this fat dandy in some way. He left
the girl for a moment and walked towards the gentleman.
“Hey! You Svidrigaïlov! What do you want here?” he shouted, clenching his
fists and laughing, spluttering with rage.
“What do you mean?” the gentleman asked sternly, scowling in haughty
astonishment.
“Get away, that’s what I mean.”
“How dare you, you low fellow!”
He raised his cane. Raskolnikov rushed at him with his fists, without
reflecting that the stout gentleman was a match for two men like himself. But at
that instant someone seized him from behind, and a police constable stood
between them.
“That’s enough, gentlemen, no fighting, please, in a public place. What do you
want? Who are you?” he asked Raskolnikov sternly, noticing his rags.
Raskolnikov looked at him intently. He had a straight-forward, sensible,
soldierly face, with grey moustaches and whiskers.
“You are just the man I want,” Raskolnikov cried, catching at his arm. “I am a
student, Raskolnikov.... You may as well know that too,” he added, addressing
the gentleman, “come along, I have something to show you.”
And taking the policeman by the hand he drew him towards the seat.
“Look here, hopelessly drunk, and she has just come down the boulevard.
There is no telling who and what she is, she does not look like a professional. It’s
more likely she has been given drink and deceived somewhere... for the first
time... you understand? and they’ve put her out into the street like that. Look at
the way her dress is torn, and the way it has been put on: she has been dressed by
somebody, she has not dressed herself, and dressed by unpractised hands, by a
man’s hands; that’s evident. And now look there: I don’t know that dandy with
whom I was going to fight, I see him for the first time, but he, too, has seen her
on the road, just now, drunk, not knowing what she is doing, and now he is very
eager to get hold of her, to get her away somewhere while she is in this state...
that’s certain, believe me, I am not wrong. I saw him myself watching her and
following her, but I prevented him, and he is just waiting for me to go away.
Now he has walked away a little, and is standing still, pretending to make a
cigarette.... Think how can we keep her out of his hands, and how are we to get
her home?”
 
