He hid his face in his hands again and bowed his head. Suddenly he turned
pale, got up from his chair, looked at Sonia, and without uttering a word sat
down mechanically on her bed.
His sensations that moment were terribly like the moment when he had stood
over the old woman with the axe in his hand and felt that “he must not lose
another minute.”
“What’s the matter?” asked Sonia, dreadfully frightened.
He could not utter a word. This was not at all, not at all the way he had
intended to “tell” and he did not understand what was happening to him now.
She went up to him, softly, sat down on the bed beside him and waited, not
taking her eyes off him. Her heart throbbed and sank. It was unendurable; he
turned his deadly pale face to her. His lips worked, helplessly struggling to utter
something. A pang of terror passed through Sonia’s heart.
“What’s the matter?” she repeated, drawing a little away from him.
“Nothing, Sonia, don’t be frightened.... It’s nonsense. It really is nonsense, if
you think of it,” he muttered, like a man in delirium. “Why have I come to
torture you?” he added suddenly, looking at her. “Why, really? I keep asking
myself that question, Sonia....”
He had perhaps been asking himself that question a quarter of an hour before,
but now he spoke helplessly, hardly knowing what he said and feeling a
continual tremor all over.
“Oh, how you are suffering!” she muttered in distress, looking intently at him.
“It’s all nonsense.... Listen, Sonia.” He suddenly smiled, a pale helpless smile
for two seconds. “You remember what I meant to tell you yesterday?”
Sonia waited uneasily.
“I said as I went away that perhaps I was saying good-bye for ever, but that if
I came to-day I would tell you who... who killed Lizaveta.”
She began trembling all over.
“Well, here I’ve come to tell you.”
“Then you really meant it yesterday?” she whispered with difficulty. “How do
you know?” she asked quickly, as though suddenly regaining her reason.
Sonia’s face grew paler and paler, and she breathed painfully.
“I know.”
She paused a minute.