“Marfa Petrovna is pleased to visit me,” he said, twisting his mouth into a
strange smile.
“How do you mean ‘she is pleased to visit you’?”
“She has been three times. I saw her first on the very day of the funeral, an
hour after she was buried. It was the day before I left to come here. The second
time was the day before yesterday, at daybreak, on the journey at the station of
Malaya Vishera, and the third time was two hours ago in the room where I am
staying. I was alone.”
“Were you awake?”
“Quite awake. I was wide awake every time. She comes, speaks to me for a
minute and goes out at the door—always at the door. I can almost hear her.”
“What made me think that something of the sort must be happening to you?”
Raskolnikov said suddenly.
At the same moment he was surprised at having said it. He was much excited.
“What! Did you think so?” Svidrigaïlov asked in astonishment. “Did you
really? Didn’t I say that there was something in common between us, eh?”
“You never said so!” Raskolnikov cried sharply and with heat.
“Didn’t I?”
“No!”
“I thought I did. When I came in and saw you lying with your eyes shut,
pretending, I said to myself at once, ‘Here’s the man.’”
“What do you mean by ‘the man?’ What are you talking about?” cried
Raskolnikov.
“What do I mean? I really don’t know....” Svidrigaïlov muttered ingenuously,
as though he, too, were puzzled.
For a minute they were silent. They stared in each other’s faces.
“That’s all nonsense!” Raskolnikov shouted with vexation. “What does she
say when she comes to you?”
“She! Would you believe it, she talks of the silliest trifles and—man is a
strange creature—it makes me angry. The first time she came in (I was tired you
know: the funeral service, the funeral ceremony, the lunch afterwards. At last I
was left alone in my study. I lighted a cigar and began to think), she came in at
the door. ‘You’ve been so busy to-day, Arkady Ivanovitch, you have forgotten to
wind the dining-room clock,’ she said. All those seven years I’ve wound that
clock every week, and if I forgot it she would always remind me. The next day I
set off on my way here. I got out at the station at daybreak; I’d been asleep, tired
out, with my eyes half open, I was drinking some coffee. I looked up and there
was suddenly Marfa Petrovna sitting beside me with a pack of cards in her
hands. ‘Shall I tell your fortune for the journey, Arkady Ivanovitch?’ She was a
great hand at telling fortunes. I shall never forgive myself for not asking her to. I
ran away in a fright, and, besides, the bell rang. I was sitting to-day, feeling very
heavy after a miserable dinner from a cookshop; I was sitting smoking, all of a
sudden Marfa Petrovna again. She came in very smart in a new green silk dress
with a long train. ‘Good day, Arkady Ivanovitch! How do you like my dress?
Aniska can’t make like this.’ (Aniska was a dressmaker in the country, one of our
former serf girls who had been trained in Moscow, a pretty wench.) She stood
turning round before me. I looked at the dress, and then I looked carefully, very
carefully, at her face. ‘I wonder you trouble to come to me about such trifles,
Marfa Petrovna.’ ‘Good gracious, you won’t let one disturb you about anything!’
To tease her I said, ‘I want to get married, Marfa Petrovna.’ ‘That’s just like you,
Arkady Ivanovitch; it does you very little credit to come looking for a bride
when you’ve hardly buried your wife. And if you could make a good choice, at
least, but I know it won’t be for your happiness or hers, you will only be a
laughing-stock to all good people.’ Then she went out and her train seemed to
rustle. Isn’t it nonsense, eh?” 
