Amalia Ivanovna was foreseeing something amiss, and at the same time
deeply wounded by Katerina Ivanovna’s haughtiness, and to restore the goodhumour
of the company and raise herself in their esteem she began, apropos of
nothing, telling a story about an acquaintance of hers “Karl from the chemist’s,”
who was driving one night in a cab, and that “the cabman wanted him to kill, and
Karl very much begged him not to kill, and wept and clasped hands, and
frightened and from fear pierced his heart.” Though Katerina Ivanovna smiled,
she observed at once that Amalia Ivanovna ought not to tell anecdotes in
Russian; the latter was still more offended, and she retorted that her “Vater aus
Berlin was a very important man, and always went with his hands in pockets.”
Katerina Ivanovna could not restrain herself and laughed so much that Amalia
Ivanovna lost patience and could scarcely control herself.
“Listen to the owl!” Katerina Ivanovna whispered at once, her good-humour
almost restored, “she meant to say he kept his hands in his pockets, but she said
he put his hands in people’s pockets. (Cough-cough.) And have you noticed,
Rodion Romanovitch, that all these Petersburg foreigners, the Germans
especially, are all stupider than we! Can you fancy anyone of us telling how
‘Karl from the chemist’s’ ‘pierced his heart from fear’ and that the idiot, instead
of punishing the cabman, ‘clasped his hands and wept, and much begged.’ Ah,
the fool! And you know she fancies it’s very touching and does not suspect how
stupid she is! To my thinking that drunken commissariat clerk is a great deal
cleverer, anyway one can see that he has addled his brains with drink, but you
know, these foreigners are always so well behaved and serious.... Look how she
sits glaring! She is angry, ha-ha! (Cough-cough-cough.)”
Regaining her good-humour, Katerina Ivanovna began at once telling
Raskolnikov that when she had obtained her pension, she intended to open a
school for the daughters of gentlemen in her native town T——. This was the
first time she had spoken to him of the project, and she launched out into the
most alluring details. It suddenly appeared that Katerina Ivanovna had in her
hands the very certificate of honour of which Marmeladov had spoken to
Raskolnikov in the tavern, when he told him that Katerina Ivanovna, his wife,
had danced the shawl dance before the governor and other great personages on
leaving school. This certificate of honour was obviously intended now to prove
Katerina Ivanovna’s right to open a boarding-school; but she had armed herself
with it chiefly with the object of overwhelming “those two stuck-up
draggletails” if they came to the dinner, and proving incontestably that Katerina
Ivanovna was of the most noble, “she might even say aristocratic family, a
colonel’s daughter and was far superior to certain adventuresses who have been
so much to the fore of late.” The certificate of honour immediately passed into
the hands of the drunken guests, and Katerina Ivanovna did not try to retain it,
for it actually contained the statement en toutes lettres, that her father was of the
rank of a major, and also a companion of an order, so that she really was almost
the daughter of a colonel.
Warming up, Katerina Ivanovna proceeded to enlarge on the peaceful and
happy life they would lead in T——, on the gymnasium teachers whom she
would engage to give lessons in her boarding-school, one a most respectable old
Frenchman, one Mangot, who had taught Katerina Ivanovna herself in old days
and was still living in T——, and would no doubt teach in her school on
moderate terms. Next she spoke of Sonia who would go with her to T—— and
help her in all her plans. At this someone at the further end of the table gave a
sudden guffaw.