As soon as Porfiry Petrovitch heard that his visitor had a little matter of
business with him, he begged him to sit down on the sofa and sat down himself
on the other end, waiting for him to explain his business, with that careful and
over-serious attention which is at once oppressive and embarrassing, especially
to a stranger, and especially if what you are discussing is in your opinion of far
too little importance for such exceptional solemnity. But in brief and coherent
phrases Raskolnikov explained his business clearly and exactly, and was so well
satisfied with himself that he even succeeded in taking a good look at Porfiry.
Porfiry Petrovitch did not once take his eyes off him. Razumihin, sitting opposite
at the same table, listened warmly and impatiently, looking from one to the other
every moment with rather excessive interest.
“Fool,” Raskolnikov swore to himself.
“You have to give information to the police,” Porfiry replied, with a most
businesslike air, “that having learnt of this incident, that is of the murder, you
beg to inform the lawyer in charge of the case that such and such things belong
to you, and that you desire to redeem them... or... but they will write to you.”
“That’s just the point, that at the present moment,” Raskolnikov tried his
utmost to feign embarrassment, “I am not quite in funds... and even this trifling
sum is beyond me... I only wanted, you see, for the present to declare that the
things are mine, and that when I have money....”
“That’s no matter,” answered Porfiry Petrovitch, receiving his explanation of
his pecuniary position coldly, “but you can, if you prefer, write straight to me, to
say, that having been informed of the matter, and claiming such and such as your
property, you beg...”
“On an ordinary sheet of paper?” Raskolnikov interrupted eagerly, again
interested in the financial side of the question.
“Oh, the most ordinary,” and suddenly Porfiry Petrovitch looked with obvious
irony at him, screwing up his eyes and, as it were, winking at him. But perhaps it
was Raskolnikov’s fancy, for it all lasted but a moment. There was certainly
something of the sort, Raskolnikov could have sworn he winked at him,
goodness knows why.
“He knows,” flashed through his mind like lightning.
“Forgive my troubling you about such trifles,” he went on, a little
disconcerted, “the things are only worth five roubles, but I prize them
particularly for the sake of those from whom they came to me, and I must
confess that I was alarmed when I heard...”
“That’s why you were so much struck when I mentioned to Zossimov that
Porfiry was inquiring for everyone who had pledges!” Razumihin put in with
obvious intention. 
