He reproached the other with being a beggar, with having
no standing whatever. He declared that he had taken the other out of the gutter
and he could turn him out when he liked, and that only the finger of Providence
sees it all. The object of his reproaches was sitting in a chair, and had the air of a
man who wants dreadfully to sneeze, but can’t. He sometimes turned sheepish
and befogged eyes on the speaker, but obviously had not the slightest idea what
he was talking about and scarcely heard it. A candle was burning down on the
table; there were wine-glasses, a nearly empty bottle of vodka, bread and
cucumber, and glasses with the dregs of stale tea. After gazing attentively at this,
Svidrigaïlov turned away indifferently and sat down on the bed.
The ragged attendant, returning with the tea, could not resist asking him again
whether he didn’t want anything more, and again receiving a negative reply,
finally withdrew. Svidrigaïlov made haste to drink a glass of tea to warm
himself, but could not eat anything. He began to feel feverish. He took off his
coat and, wrapping himself in the blanket, lay down on the bed. He was
annoyed. “It would have been better to be well for the occasion,” he thought
with a smile. The room was close, the candle burnt dimly, the wind was roaring
outside, he heard a mouse scratching in the corner and the room smelt of mice
and of leather. He lay in a sort of reverie: one thought followed another. He felt a
longing to fix his imagination on something. “It must be a garden under the
window,” he thought. “There’s a sound of trees. How I dislike the sound of trees
on a stormy night, in the dark! They give one a horrid feeling.” He remembered
how he had disliked it when he passed Petrovsky Park just now. This reminded
him of the bridge over the Little Neva and he felt cold again as he had when
standing there. “I never have liked water,” he thought, “even in a landscape,”
and he suddenly smiled again at a strange idea: “Surely now all these questions
of taste and comfort ought not to matter, but I’ve become more particular, like an
animal that picks out a special place... for such an occasion. I ought to have gone
into the Petrovsky Park! I suppose it seemed dark, cold, ha-ha! As though I were
seeking pleasant sensations!... By the way, why haven’t I put out the candle?” he
blew it out. “They’ve gone to bed next door,” he thought, not seeing the light at
the crack. “Well, now, Marfa Petrovna, now is the time for you to turn up; it’s
dark, and the very time and place for you. But now you won’t come!”