He sprinkled some water over her. Dounia shuddered and came to herself.
“It has acted violently,” Svidrigaïlov muttered to himself, frowning. “Avdotya
Romanovna, calm yourself! Believe me, he has friends. We will save him.
Would you like me to take him abroad? I have money, I can get a ticket in three
days. And as for the murder, he will do all sorts of good deeds yet, to atone for it.
Calm yourself. He may become a great man yet. Well, how are you? How do
you feel?”
“Cruel man! To be able to jeer at it! Let me go...”
“Where are you going?”
“To him. Where is he? Do you know? Why is this door locked? We came in at
that door and now it is locked. When did you manage to lock it?”
“We couldn’t be shouting all over the flat on such a subject. I am far from
jeering; it’s simply that I’m sick of talking like this. But how can you go in such
a state? Do you want to betray him? You will drive him to fury, and he will give
himself up. Let me tell you, he is already being watched; they are already on his
track. You will simply be giving him away. Wait a little: I saw him and was
talking to him just now. He can still be saved. Wait a bit, sit down; let us think it
over together. I asked you to come in order to discuss it alone with you and to
consider it thoroughly. But do sit down!”
“How can you save him? Can he really be saved?”
Dounia sat down. Svidrigaïlov sat down beside her.
“It all depends on you, on you, on you alone,” he began with glowing eyes,
almost in a whisper and hardly able to utter the words for emotion.
Dounia drew back from him in alarm. He too was trembling all over.
“You... one word from you, and he is saved. I... I’ll save him. I have money
and friends. I’ll send him away at once. I’ll get a passport, two passports, one for
him and one for me. I have friends... capable people.... If you like, I’ll take a
passport for you... for your mother.... What do you want with Razumihin? I love
you too.... I love you beyond everything.... Let me kiss the hem of your dress, let
me, let me.... The very rustle of it is too much for me. Tell me, ‘do that,’ and I’ll
do it. I’ll do everything. I will do the impossible. What you believe, I will
believe. I’ll do anything—anything! Don’t, don’t look at me like that. Do you
know that you are killing me?...”
He was almost beginning to rave.... Something seemed suddenly to go to his
head. Dounia jumped up and rushed to the door.
“Open it! Open it!” she called, shaking the door. “Open it! Is there no one
there?”