His eyes shone with feverish brilliance. He was almost delirious; an uneasy
smile strayed on his lips. His terrible exhaustion could be seen through his
excitement. Sonia saw how he was suffering. She too was growing dizzy. And he
talked so strangely; it seemed somehow comprehensible, but yet... “But how,
how! Good God!” And she wrung her hands in despair.
“No, Sonia, that’s not it,” he began again suddenly, raising his head, as though
a new and sudden train of thought had struck and as it were roused him—“that’s
not it! Better... imagine—yes, it’s certainly better—imagine that I am vain,
envious, malicious, base, vindictive and... well, perhaps with a tendency to
insanity. (Let’s have it all out at once! They’ve talked of madness already, I
noticed.) I told you just now I could not keep myself at the university. But do
you know that perhaps I might have done? My mother would have sent me what
I needed for the fees and I could have earned enough for clothes, boots and food,
no doubt. Lessons had turned up at half a rouble. Razumihin works! But I turned
sulky and wouldn’t. (Yes, sulkiness, that’s the right word for it!) I sat in my room
like a spider. You’ve been in my den, you’ve seen it.... And do you know, Sonia,
that low ceilings and tiny rooms cramp the soul and the mind? Ah, how I hated
that garret! And yet I wouldn’t go out of it! I wouldn’t on purpose! I didn’t go
out for days together, and I wouldn’t work, I wouldn’t even eat, I just lay there
doing nothing. If Nastasya brought me anything, I ate it, if she didn’t, I went all
day without; I wouldn’t ask, on purpose, from sulkiness! At night I had no light,
I lay in the dark and I wouldn’t earn money for candles. I ought to have studied,
but I sold my books; and the dust lies an inch thick on the notebooks on my
table. I preferred lying still and thinking. And I kept thinking.... And I had
dreams all the time, strange dreams of all sorts, no need to describe! Only then I
began to fancy that... No, that’s not it! Again I am telling you wrong! You see I
kept asking myself then: why am I so stupid that if others are stupid—and I
know they are—yet I won’t be wiser? Then I saw, Sonia, that if one waits for
everyone to get wiser it will take too long.... Afterwards I understood that that
would never come to pass, that men won’t change and that nobody can alter it
and that it’s not worth wasting effort over it. Yes, that’s so. That’s the law of their
nature, Sonia,... that’s so!... And I know now, Sonia, that whoever is strong in
mind and spirit will have power over them. Anyone who is greatly daring is right
in their eyes. He who despises most things will be a lawgiver among them and
he who dares most of all will be most in the right! So it has been till now and so
it will always be. A man must be blind not to see it!”
Though Raskolnikov looked at Sonia as he said this, he no longer cared
whether she understood or not. The fever had complete hold of him; he was in a
sort of gloomy ecstasy (he certainly had been too long without talking to
anyone). Sonia felt that his gloomy creed had become his faith and code.