And yet as he dressed he examined his attire more carefully than usual. He
hadn’t another suit—if he had had, perhaps he wouldn’t have put it on. “I would
have made a point of not putting it on.” But in any case he could not remain a
cynic and a dirty sloven; he had no right to offend the feelings of others,
especially when they were in need of his assistance and asking him to see them.
He brushed his clothes carefully. His linen was always decent; in that respect he
was especially clean.
He washed that morning scrupulously—he got some soap from Nastasya—he
washed his hair, his neck and especially his hands. When it came to the question
whether to shave his stubbly chin or not (Praskovya Pavlovna had capital razors
that had been left by her late husband), the question was angrily answered in the
negative. “Let it stay as it is! What if they think that I shaved on purpose to...?
They certainly would think so! Not on any account!”
“And... the worst of it was he was so coarse, so dirty, he had the manners of a
pothouse; and... and even admitting that he knew he had some of the essentials
of a gentleman... what was there in that to be proud of? Everyone ought to be a
gentleman and more than that... and all the same (he remembered) he, too, had
done little things... not exactly dishonest, and yet.... And what thoughts he
sometimes had; hm... and to set all that beside Avdotya Romanovna! Confound
it! So be it! Well, he’d make a point then of being dirty, greasy, pothouse in his
manners and he wouldn’t care! He’d be worse!”
He was engaged in such monologues when Zossimov, who had spent the night
in Praskovya Pavlovna’s parlour, came in.
He was going home and was in a hurry to look at the invalid first. Razumihin
informed him that Raskolnikov was sleeping like a dormouse. Zossimov gave
orders that they shouldn’t wake him and promised to see him again about eleven.
“If he is still at home,” he added. “Damn it all! If one can’t control one’s
patients, how is one to cure them? Do you know whether he will go to them, or
whether they are coming here?”
“They are coming, I think,” said Razumihin, understanding the object of the
question, “and they will discuss their family affairs, no doubt. I’ll be off. You, as
the doctor, have more right to be here than I.”
“But I am not a father confessor; I shall come and go away; I’ve plenty to do
besides looking after them.”
“One thing worries me,” interposed Razumihin, frowning. “On the way home
I talked a lot of drunken nonsense to him... all sorts of things... and amongst
them that you were afraid that he... might become insane.” 
