And Pyotr Petrovitch held out to Sonia a ten-rouble note carefully unfolded.
Sonia took it, flushed crimson, jumped up, muttered something and began taking
leave. Pyotr Petrovitch accompanied her ceremoniously to the door. She got out
of the room at last, agitated and distressed, and returned to Katerina Ivanovna,
overwhelmed with confusion.
All this time Lebeziatnikov had stood at the window or walked about the
room, anxious not to interrupt the conversation; when Sonia had gone he walked
up to Pyotr Petrovitch and solemnly held out his hand.
“I heard and saw everything,” he said, laying stress on the last verb. “That is
honourable, I mean to say, it’s humane! You wanted to avoid gratitude, I saw!
And although I cannot, I confess, in principle sympathise with private charity,
for it not only fails to eradicate the evil but even promotes it, yet I must admit
that I saw your action with pleasure—yes, yes, I like it.”
“That’s all nonsense,” muttered Pyotr Petrovitch, somewhat disconcerted,
looking carefully at Lebeziatnikov.
“No, it’s not nonsense! A man who has suffered distress and annoyance as you
did yesterday and who yet can sympathise with the misery of others, such a
man... even though he is making a social mistake—is still deserving of respect! I
did not expect it indeed of you, Pyotr Petrovitch, especially as according to your
ideas... oh, what a drawback your ideas are to you! How distressed you are for
instance by your ill-luck yesterday,” cried the simple-hearted Lebeziatnikov, who
felt a return of affection for Pyotr Petrovitch. “And, what do you want with
marriage, with legal marriage, my dear, noble Pyotr Petrovitch? Why do you
cling to this legality of marriage? Well, you may beat me if you like, but I am
glad, positively glad it hasn’t come off, that you are free, that you are not quite
lost for humanity.... you see, I’ve spoken my mind!”
“Because I don’t want in your free marriage to be made a fool of and to bring
up another man’s children, that’s why I want legal marriage,” Luzhin replied in
order to make some answer.
He seemed preoccupied by something.