“Why don’t you drink your tea? It’s getting cold,” said Zametov.
“What! Tea? Oh, yes....” Raskolnikov sipped the glass, put a morsel of bread
in his mouth and, suddenly looking at Zametov, seemed to remember everything
and pulled himself together. At the same moment his face resumed its original
mocking expression. He went on drinking tea.
“There have been a great many of these crimes lately,” said Zametov. “Only
the other day I read in the Moscow News that a whole gang of false coiners had
been caught in Moscow. It was a regular society. They used to forge tickets!”
“Oh, but it was a long time ago! I read about it a month ago,” Raskolnikov
answered calmly. “So you consider them criminals?” he added, smiling.
“Of course they are criminals.”
“They? They are children, simpletons, not criminals! Why, half a hundred
people meeting for such an object—what an idea! Three would be too many, and
then they want to have more faith in one another than in themselves! One has
only to blab in his cups and it all collapses. Simpletons! They engaged
untrustworthy people to change the notes—what a thing to trust to a casual
stranger! Well, let us suppose that these simpletons succeed and each makes a
million, and what follows for the rest of their lives? Each is dependent on the
others for the rest of his life! Better hang oneself at once! And they did not know
how to change the notes either; the man who changed the notes took five
thousand roubles, and his hands trembled. He counted the first four thousand,
but did not count the fifth thousand—he was in such a hurry to get the money
into his pocket and run away. Of course he roused suspicion. And the whole
thing came to a crash through one fool! Is it possible?”
“That his hands trembled?” observed Zametov, “yes, that’s quite possible.
That, I feel quite sure, is possible. Sometimes one can’t stand things.”
“Can’t stand that?”
“Why, could you stand it then? No, I couldn’t. For the sake of a hundred
roubles to face such a terrible experience? To go with false notes into a bank
where it’s their business to spot that sort of thing! No, I should not have the face
to do it. Would you?”
Raskolnikov had an intense desire again “to put his tongue out.” Shivers kept
running down his spine.
 
