At nine o’clock precisely Razumihin reached the lodgings at Bakaleyev’s
house. Both ladies were waiting for him with nervous impatience. They had
risen at seven o’clock or earlier. He entered looking as black as night, bowed
awkwardly and was at once furious with himself for it. He had reckoned without
his host: Pulcheria Alexandrovna fairly rushed at him, seized him by both hands
and was almost kissing them. He glanced timidly at Avdotya Romanovna, but
her proud countenance wore at that moment an expression of such gratitude and
friendliness, such complete and unlooked-for respect (in place of the sneering
looks and ill-disguised contempt he had expected), that it threw him into greater
confusion than if he had been met with abuse. Fortunately there was a subject for
conversation, and he made haste to snatch at it.
Hearing that everything was going well and that Rodya had not yet waked,
Pulcheria Alexandrovna declared that she was glad to hear it, because “she had
something which it was very, very necessary to talk over beforehand.” Then
followed an inquiry about breakfast and an invitation to have it with them; they
had waited to have it with him. Avdotya Romanovna rang the bell: it was
answered by a ragged dirty waiter, and they asked him to bring tea which was
served at last, but in such a dirty and disorderly way that the ladies were
ashamed. Razumihin vigorously attacked the lodgings, but, remembering
Luzhin, stopped in embarrassment and was greatly relieved by Pulcheria
Alexandrovna’s questions, which showered in a continual stream upon him.
He talked for three quarters of an hour, being constantly interrupted by their
questions, and succeeded in describing to them all the most important facts he
knew of the last year of Raskolnikov’s life, concluding with a circumstantial
account of his illness. He omitted, however, many things, which were better
omitted, including the scene at the police station with all its consequences. They
listened eagerly to his story, and, when he thought he had finished and satisfied
his listeners, he found that they considered he had hardly begun.
“Tell me, tell me! What do you think...? Excuse me, I still don’t know your
name!” Pulcheria Alexandrovna put in hastily.
“Dmitri Prokofitch.”
“I should like very, very much to know, Dmitri Prokofitch... how he looks...
on things in general now, that is, how can I explain, what are his likes and
dislikes? Is he always so irritable? Tell me, if you can, what are his hopes and, so
to say, his dreams? Under what influences is he now? In a word, I should like...”
“Ah, mother, how can he answer all that at once?” observed Dounia.
“Good heavens, I had not expected to find him in the least like this, Dmitri
Prokofitch!” 
