“And there,” said Razumihin, “weren’t you mad then? You gave your last
penny to the widow for the funeral. If you wanted to help, give fifteen or twenty
even, but keep three roubles for yourself at least, but he flung away all the
twenty-five at once!”
“Maybe I found a treasure somewhere and you know nothing of it? So that’s
why I was liberal yesterday.... Mr. Zametov knows I’ve found a treasure! Excuse
us, please, for disturbing you for half an hour with such trivialities,” he said,
turning to Porfiry Petrovitch, with trembling lips. “We are boring you, aren’t
we?”
“Oh no, quite the contrary, quite the contrary! If only you knew how you
interest me! It’s interesting to look on and listen... and I am really glad you have
come forward at last.”
“But you might give us some tea! My throat’s dry,” cried Razumihin.
“Capital idea! Perhaps we will all keep you company. Wouldn’t you like...
something more essential before tea?”
“Get along with you!”
Porfiry Petrovitch went out to order tea.
Raskolnikov’s thoughts were in a whirl. He was in terrible exasperation.
“The worst of it is they don’t disguise it; they don’t care to stand on
ceremony! And how if you didn’t know me at all, did you come to talk to
Nikodim Fomitch about me? So they don’t care to hide that they are tracking me
like a pack of dogs. They simply spit in my face.” He was shaking with rage.
“Come, strike me openly, don’t play with me like a cat with a mouse. It’s hardly
civil, Porfiry Petrovitch, but perhaps I won’t allow it! I shall get up and throw
the whole truth in your ugly faces, and you’ll see how I despise you.” He could
hardly breathe. “And what if it’s only my fancy? What if I am mistaken, and
through inexperience I get angry and don’t keep up my nasty part? Perhaps it’s
all unintentional. All their phrases are the usual ones, but there is something
about them.... It all might be said, but there is something. Why did he say
bluntly, ‘With her’? Why did Zametov add that I spoke artfully? Why do they
speak in that tone? Yes, the tone.... Razumihin is sitting here, why does he see
nothing? That innocent blockhead never does see anything! Feverish again! Did
Porfiry wink at me just now? Of course it’s nonsense! What could he wink for?
Are they trying to upset my nerves or are they teasing me? Either it’s ill fancy or
they know! Even Zametov is rude.... Is Zametov rude? Zametov has changed his
mind. I foresaw he would change his mind! He is at home here, while it’s my
first visit. Porfiry does not consider him a visitor; sits with his back to him. 
