“There’s no knowing who’s a gentleman and who isn’t nowadays.”
These exclamations and remarks checked Raskolnikov, and the words, “I am a
murderer,” which were perhaps on the point of dropping from his lips, died
away. He bore these remarks quietly, however, and, without looking round, he
turned down a street leading to the police office. He had a glimpse of something
on the way which did not surprise him; he had felt that it must be so. The second
time he bowed down in the Hay Market he saw, standing fifty paces from him on
the left, Sonia. She was hiding from him behind one of the wooden shanties in
the market-place. She had followed him then on his painful way! Raskolnikov at
that moment felt and knew once for all that Sonia was with him for ever and
would follow him to the ends of the earth, wherever fate might take him. It
wrung his heart... but he was just reaching the fatal place.
He went into the yard fairly resolutely. He had to mount to the third storey. “I
shall be some time going up,” he thought. He felt as though the fateful moment
was still far off, as though he had plenty of time left for consideration.
Again the same rubbish, the same eggshells lying about on the spiral stairs,
again the open doors of the flats, again the same kitchens and the same fumes
and stench coming from them. Raskolnikov had not been here since that day. His
legs were numb and gave way under him, but still they moved forward. He
stopped for a moment to take breath, to collect himself, so as to enter like a man.
“But why? what for?” he wondered, reflecting. “If I must drink the cup what
difference does it make? The more revolting the better.” He imagined for an
instant the figure of the “explosive lieutenant,” Ilya Petrovitch. Was he actually
going to him? Couldn’t he go to someone else? To Nikodim Fomitch? Couldn’t
he turn back and go straight to Nikodim Fomitch’s lodgings? At least then it
would be done privately.... No, no! To the “explosive lieutenant”! If he must
drink it, drink it off at once.
Turning cold and hardly conscious, he opened the door of the office. There
were very few people in it this time—only a house porter and a peasant. The
doorkeeper did not even peep out from behind his screen. Raskolnikov walked
into the next room. “Perhaps I still need not speak,” passed through his mind.
Some sort of clerk not wearing a uniform was settling himself at a bureau to
write. In a corner another clerk was seating himself. Zametov was not there, nor,
of course, Nikodim Fomitch.