“It is expressed in legal style, and sounds coarser than perhaps he intended.
But I must disillusion you a little. There is one expression in the letter, one
slander about me, and rather a contemptible one. I gave the money last night to
the widow, a woman in consumption, crushed with trouble, and not ‘on the
pretext of the funeral,’ but simply to pay for the funeral, and not to the daughter
—a young woman, as he writes, of notorious behaviour (whom I saw last night
for the first time in my life)—but to the widow. In all this I see a too hasty desire
to slander me and to raise dissension between us. It is expressed again in legal
jargon, that is to say, with a too obvious display of the aim, and with a very naïve
eagerness. He is a man of intelligence, but to act sensibly, intelligence is not
enough. It all shows the man and... I don’t think he has a great esteem for you. I
tell you this simply to warn you, because I sincerely wish for your good...”
Dounia did not reply. Her resolution had been taken. She was only awaiting
the evening.
“Then what is your decision, Rodya?” asked Pulcheria Alexandrovna, who
was more uneasy than ever at the sudden, new businesslike tone of his talk.
“What decision?”
“You see Pyotr Petrovitch writes that you are not to be with us this evening,
and that he will go away if you come. So will you... come?”
“That, of course, is not for me to decide, but for you first, if you are not
offended by such a request; and secondly, by Dounia, if she, too, is not offended.
I will do what you think best,” he added, drily.
“Dounia has already decided, and I fully agree with her,” Pulcheria
Alexandrovna hastened to declare.
“I decided to ask you, Rodya, to urge you not to fail to be with us at this
interview,” said Dounia. “Will you come?”
“Yes.”
“I will ask you, too, to be with us at eight o’clock,” she said, addressing
Razumihin. “Mother, I am inviting him, too.”
“Quite right, Dounia. Well, since you have decided,” added Pulcheria
Alexandrovna, “so be it. I shall feel easier myself. I do not like concealment and
deception. Better let us have the whole truth.... Pyotr Petrovitch may be angry or
not, now!” 
