Svidrigaïlov informed her at once that he was obliged by very important
affairs to leave Petersburg for a time, and therefore brought her fifteen thousand
roubles and begged her accept them as a present from him, as he had long been
intending to make her this trifling present before their wedding. The logical
connection of the present with his immediate departure and the absolute
necessity of visiting them for that purpose in pouring rain at midnight was not
made clear. But it all went off very well; even the inevitable ejaculations of
wonder and regret, the inevitable questions were extraordinarily few and
restrained. On the other hand, the gratitude expressed was most glowing and was
reinforced by tears from the most sensible of mothers. Svidrigaïlov got up,
laughed, kissed his betrothed, patted her cheek, declared he would soon come
back, and noticing in her eyes, together with childish curiosity, a sort of earnest
dumb inquiry, reflected and kissed her again, though he felt sincere anger
inwardly at the thought that his present would be immediately locked up in the
keeping of the most sensible of mothers. He went away, leaving them all in a
state of extraordinary excitement, but the tender mamma, speaking quietly in a
half whisper, settled some of the most important of their doubts, concluding that
Svidrigaïlov was a great man, a man of great affairs and connections and of great
wealth—there was no knowing what he had in his mind. He would start off on a
journey and give away money just as the fancy took him, so that there was
nothing surprising about it. Of course it was strange that he was wet through, but
Englishmen, for instance, are even more eccentric, and all these people of high
society didn’t think of what was said of them and didn’t stand on ceremony.
Possibly, indeed, he came like that on purpose to show that he was not afraid of
anyone. Above all, not a word should be said about it, for God knows what
might come of it, and the money must be locked up, and it was most fortunate
that Fedosya, the cook, had not left the kitchen. And above all not a word must
be said to that old cat, Madame Resslich, and so on and so on. They sat up
whispering till two o’clock, but the girl went to bed much earlier, amazed and
rather sorrowful.