But Dounia and her husband could get little comfort out of the news,
especially at first. Sonia wrote that he was constantly sullen and not ready to
talk, that he scarcely seemed interested in the news she gave him from their
letters, that he sometimes asked after his mother and that when, seeing that he
had guessed the truth, she told him at last of her death, she was surprised to find
that he did not seem greatly affected by it, not externally at any rate. She told
them that, although he seemed so wrapped up in himself and, as it were, shut
himself off from everyone—he took a very direct and simple view of his new
life; that he understood his position, expected nothing better for the time, had no
ill-founded hopes (as is so common in his position) and scarcely seemed
surprised at anything in his surroundings, so unlike anything he had known
before. She wrote that his health was satisfactory; he did his work without
shirking or seeking to do more; he was almost indifferent about food, but except
on Sundays and holidays the food was so bad that at last he had been glad to
accept some money from her, Sonia, to have his own tea every day. He begged
her not to trouble about anything else, declaring that all this fuss about him only
annoyed him. Sonia wrote further that in prison he shared the same room with
the rest, that she had not seen the inside of their barracks, but concluded that
they were crowded, miserable and unhealthy; that he slept on a plank bed with a
rug under him and was unwilling to make any other arrangement. But that he
lived so poorly and roughly, not from any plan or design, but simply from
inattention and indifference.
Sonia wrote simply that he had at first shown no interest in her visits, had
almost been vexed with her indeed for coming, unwilling to talk and rude to her.
But that in the end these visits had become a habit and almost a necessity for
him, so that he was positively distressed when she was ill for some days and
could not visit him. She used to see him on holidays at the prison gates or in the
guard-room, to which he was brought for a few minutes to see her. On working
days she would go to see him at work either at the workshops or at the brick
kilns, or at the sheds on the banks of the Irtish.