“Well, you have certainly set my mind more at rest on that score; but there’s
another thing worries me. Tell me, please, are there many people who have the
right to kill others, these extraordinary people? I am ready to bow down to them,
of course, but you must admit it’s alarming if there are a great many of them,
eh?”
“Oh, you needn’t worry about that either,” Raskolnikov went on in the same
tone. “People with new ideas, people with the faintest capacity for saying
something new, are extremely few in number, extraordinarily so in fact. One
thing only is clear, that the appearance of all these grades and sub-divisions of
men must follow with unfailing regularity some law of nature. That law, of
course, is unknown at present, but I am convinced that it exists, and one day may
become known. The vast mass of mankind is mere material, and only exists in
order by some great effort, by some mysterious process, by means of some
crossing of races and stocks, to bring into the world at last perhaps one man out
of a thousand with a spark of independence. One in ten thousand perhaps—I
speak roughly, approximately—is born with some independence, and with still
greater independence one in a hundred thousand. The man of genius is one of
millions, and the great geniuses, the crown of humanity, appear on earth perhaps
one in many thousand millions. In fact I have not peeped into the retort in which
all this takes place. But there certainly is and must be a definite law, it cannot be
a matter of chance.”
“Why, are you both joking?” Razumihin cried at last. “There you sit, making
fun of one another. Are you serious, Rodya?”
Raskolnikov raised his pale and almost mournful face and made no reply. And
the unconcealed, persistent, nervous, and discourteous sarcasm of Porfiry
seemed strange to Razumihin beside that quiet and mournful face.
“Well, brother, if you are really serious... You are right, of course, in saying
that it’s not new, that it’s like what we’ve read and heard a thousand times
already; but what is really original in all this, and is exclusively your own, to my
horror, is that you sanction bloodshed in the name of conscience, and, excuse my
saying so, with such fanaticism.... That, I take it, is the point of your article. But
that sanction of bloodshed by conscience is to my mind... more terrible than the
official, legal sanction of bloodshed....” 
