“I knew you would scream at me; but in the first place, though I am not rich,
this ten thousand roubles is perfectly free; I have absolutely no need for it. If
Avdotya Romanovna does not accept it, I shall waste it in some more foolish
way. That’s the first thing. Secondly, my conscience is perfectly easy; I make the
offer with no ulterior motive. You may not believe it, but in the end Avdotya
Romanovna and you will know. The point is, that I did actually cause your sister,
whom I greatly respect, some trouble and unpleasantness, and so, sincerely
regretting it, I want—not to compensate, not to repay her for the unpleasantness,
but simply to do something to her advantage, to show that I am not, after all,
privileged to do nothing but harm. If there were a millionth fraction of selfinterest in my offer, I should not have made it so openly; and I should not have
offered her ten thousand only, when five weeks ago I offered her more, Besides,
I may, perhaps, very soon marry a young lady, and that alone ought to prevent
suspicion of any design on Avdotya Romanovna. In conclusion, let me say that
in marrying Mr. Luzhin, she is taking money just the same, only from another
man. Don’t be angry, Rodion Romanovitch, think it over coolly and quietly.”
Svidrigaïlov himself was exceedingly cool and quiet as he was saying this.
“I beg you to say no more,” said Raskolnikov. “In any case this is
unpardonable impertinence.”
“Not in the least. Then a man may do nothing but harm to his neighbour in
this world, and is prevented from doing the tiniest bit of good by trivial
conventional formalities. That’s absurd. If I died, for instance, and left that sum
to your sister in my will, surely she wouldn’t refuse it?”
“Very likely she would.”
“Oh, no, indeed. However, if you refuse it, so be it, though ten thousand
roubles is a capital thing to have on occasion. In any case I beg you to repeat
what I have said to Avdotya Romanovna.”
“No, I won’t.”
“In that case, Rodion Romanovitch, I shall be obliged to try and see her
myself and worry her by doing so.”
“And if I do tell her, will you not try to see her?”
“I don’t know really what to say. I should like very much to see her once
more.”
 
