“Quite so,” Svidrigaïlov smiled with engaging candour. “What of it? You
seem to find something wrong in my speaking like that about women?”
“You ask whether I find anything wrong in vice?”
“Vice! Oh, that’s what you are after! But I’ll answer you in order, first about
women in general; you know I am fond of talking. Tell me, what should I
restrain myself for? Why should I give up women, since I have a passion for
them? It’s an occupation, anyway.”
“So you hope for nothing here but vice?”
“Oh, very well, for vice then. You insist on its being vice. But anyway I like a
direct question. In this vice at least there is something permanent, founded
indeed upon nature and not dependent on fantasy, something present in the blood
like an ever-burning ember, for ever setting one on fire and, maybe, not to be
quickly extinguished, even with years. You’ll agree it’s an occupation of a sort.”
“That’s nothing to rejoice at, it’s a disease and a dangerous one.”
“Oh, that’s what you think, is it! I agree, that it is a disease like everything that
exceeds moderation. And, of course, in this one must exceed moderation. But in
the first place, everybody does so in one way or another, and in the second place,
of course, one ought to be moderate and prudent, however mean it may be, but
what am I to do? If I hadn’t this, I might have to shoot myself. I am ready to
admit that a decent man ought to put up with being bored, but yet...”
“And could you shoot yourself?”
“Oh, come!” Svidrigaïlov parried with disgust. “Please don’t speak of it,” he
added hurriedly and with none of the bragging tone he had shown in all the
previous conversation. His face quite changed. “I admit it’s an unpardonable
weakness, but I can’t help it. I am afraid of death and I dislike its being talked of.
Do you know that I am to a certain extent a mystic?”
“Ah, the apparitions of Marfa Petrovna! Do they still go on visiting you?”
“Oh, don’t talk of them; there have been no more in Petersburg, confound
them!” he cried with an air of irritation. “Let’s rather talk of that... though...
H’m! I have not much time, and can’t stay long with you, it’s a pity! I should
have found plenty to tell you.”