At that moment the door was softly opened, and a young girl walked into the
room, looking timidly about her. Everyone turned towards her with surprise and
curiosity. At first sight, Raskolnikov did not recognise her. It was Sofya
Semyonovna Marmeladov. He had seen her yesterday for the first time, but at
such a moment, in such surroundings and in such a dress, that his memory
retained a very different image of her. Now she was a modestly and poorlydressed young girl, very young, indeed, almost like a child, with a modest and
refined manner, with a candid but somewhat frightened-looking face. She was
wearing a very plain indoor dress, and had on a shabby old-fashioned hat, but
she still carried a parasol. Unexpectedly finding the room full of people, she was
not so much embarrassed as completely overwhelmed with shyness, like a little
child. She was even about to retreat. “Oh... it’s you!” said Raskolnikov,
extremely astonished, and he, too, was confused. He at once recollected that his
mother and sister knew through Luzhin’s letter of “some young woman of
notorious behaviour.” He had only just been protesting against Luzhin’s calumny
and declaring that he had seen the girl last night for the first time, and suddenly
she had walked in. He remembered, too, that he had not protested against the
expression “of notorious behaviour.” All this passed vaguely and fleetingly
through his brain, but looking at her more intently, he saw that the humiliated
creature was so humiliated that he felt suddenly sorry for her. When she made a
movement to retreat in terror, it sent a pang to his heart.
“I did not expect you,” he said, hurriedly, with a look that made her stop.
“Please sit down. You come, no doubt, from Katerina Ivanovna. Allow me—not
there. Sit here....”
At Sonia’s entrance, Razumihin, who had been sitting on one of
Raskolnikov’s three chairs, close to the door, got up to allow her to enter.
Raskolnikov had at first shown her the place on the sofa where Zossimov had
been sitting, but feeling that the sofa which served him as a bed, was too familiar
a place, he hurriedly motioned her to Razumihin’s chair.
“You sit here,” he said to Razumihin, putting him on the sofa.
Sonia sat down, almost shaking with terror, and looked timidly at the two
ladies. It was evidently almost inconceivable to herself that she could sit down
beside them. At the thought of it, she was so frightened that she hurriedly got up
again, and in utter confusion addressed Raskolnikov.
 
