He was in the hospital from the middle of Lent till after Easter. When he was
better, he remembered the dreams he had had while he was feverish and
delirious. He dreamt that the whole world was condemned to a terrible new
strange plague that had come to Europe from the depths of Asia. All were to be
destroyed except a very few chosen. Some new sorts of microbes were attacking
the bodies of men, but these microbes were endowed with intelligence and will.
Men attacked by them became at once mad and furious. But never had men
considered themselves so intellectual and so completely in possession of the
truth as these sufferers, never had they considered their decisions, their scientific
conclusions, their moral convictions so infallible. Whole villages, whole towns
and peoples went mad from the infection. All were excited and did not
understand one another. Each thought that he alone had the truth and was
wretched looking at the others, beat himself on the breast, wept, and wrung his
hands. They did not know how to judge and could not agree what to consider
evil and what good; they did not know whom to blame, whom to justify. Men
killed each other in a sort of senseless spite. They gathered together in armies
against one another, but even on the march the armies would begin attacking
each other, the ranks would be broken and the soldiers would fall on each other,
stabbing and cutting, biting and devouring each other. The alarm bell was
ringing all day long in the towns; men rushed together, but why they were
summoned and who was summoning them no one knew. The most ordinary
trades were abandoned, because everyone proposed his own ideas, his own
improvements, and they could not agree. The land too was abandoned. Men met
in groups, agreed on something, swore to keep together, but at once began on
something quite different from what they had proposed. They accused one
another, fought and killed each other. There were conflagrations and famine. All
men and all things were involved in destruction. The plague spread and moved
further and further. Only a few men could be saved in the whole world. They
were a pure chosen people, destined to found a new race and a new life, to renew
and purify the earth, but no one had seen these men, no one had heard their
words and their voices.