“But perhaps you are telling lies?” Raskolnikov put in.
“I rarely lie,” answered Svidrigaïlov thoughtfully, apparently not noticing the
rudeness of the question.
“And in the past, have you ever seen ghosts before?”
“Y-yes, I have seen them, but only once in my life, six years ago. I had a serf,
Filka; just after his burial I called out forgetting ‘Filka, my pipe!’ He came in and
went to the cupboard where my pipes were. I sat still and thought ‘he is doing it
out of revenge,’ because we had a violent quarrel just before his death. ‘How
dare you come in with a hole in your elbow?’ I said. ‘Go away, you scamp!’ He
turned and went out, and never came again. I didn’t tell Marfa Petrovna at the
time. I wanted to have a service sung for him, but I was ashamed.”
“You should go to a doctor.”
“I know I am not well, without your telling me, though I don’t know what’s
wrong; I believe I am five times as strong as you are. I didn’t ask you whether
you believe that ghosts are seen, but whether you believe that they exist.”
“No, I won’t believe it!” Raskolnikov cried, with positive anger.
“What do people generally say?” muttered Svidrigaïlov, as though speaking to
himself, looking aside and bowing his head. “They say, ‘You are ill, so what
appears to you is only unreal fantasy.’ But that’s not strictly logical. I agree that
ghosts only appear to the sick, but that only proves that they are unable to appear
except to the sick, not that they don’t exist.”
“Nothing of the sort,” Raskolnikov insisted irritably.
“No? You don’t think so?” Svidrigaïlov went on, looking at him deliberately.
“But what do you say to this argument (help me with it): ghosts are, as it were,
shreds and fragments of other worlds, the beginning of them. A man in health
has, of course, no reason to see them, because he is above all a man of this earth
and is bound for the sake of completeness and order to live only in this life. But
as soon as one is ill, as soon as the normal earthly order of the organism is
broken, one begins to realise the possibility of another world; and the more
seriously ill one is, the closer becomes one’s contact with that other world, so
that as soon as the man dies he steps straight into that world. I thought of that
long ago. If you believe in a future life, you could believe in that, too.”
“I don’t believe in a future life,” said Raskolnikov.
 
