“Good heavens, Dounia, what is going to happen?” said Pulcheria
Alexandrovna, addressing her daughter with anxiety and dismay.
“Don’t worry yourself, mother,” said Dounia, taking off her hat and cape.
“God has sent this gentleman to our aid, though he has come from a drinking
party. We can depend on him, I assure you. And all that he has done for
Rodya....”
“Ah. Dounia, goodness knows whether he will come! How could I bring
myself to leave Rodya?... And how different, how different I had fancied our
meeting! How sullen he was, as though not pleased to see us....”
Tears came into her eyes.
“No, it’s not that, mother. You didn’t see, you were crying all the time. He is
quite unhinged by serious illness—that’s the reason.”
“Ah, that illness! What will happen, what will happen? And how he talked to
you, Dounia!” said the mother, looking timidly at her daughter, trying to read her
thoughts and, already half consoled by Dounia’s standing up for her brother,
which meant that she had already forgiven him. “I am sure he will think better of
it to-morrow,” she added, probing her further.
“And I am sure that he will say the same to-morrow... about that,” Avdotya
Romanovna said finally. And, of course, there was no going beyond that, for this
was a point which Pulcheria Alexandrovna was afraid to discuss. Dounia went
up and kissed her mother. The latter warmly embraced her without speaking.
Then she sat down to wait anxiously for Razumihin’s return, timidly watching
her daughter who walked up and down the room with her arms folded, lost in
thought. This walking up and down when she was thinking was a habit of
Avdotya Romanovna’s and the mother was always afraid to break in on her
daughter’s mood at such moments.
Razumihin, of course, was ridiculous in his sudden drunken infatuation for
Avdotya Romanovna. Yet apart from his eccentric condition, many people would
have thought it justified if they had seen Avdotya Romanovna, especially at that
moment when she was walking to and fro with folded arms, pensive and
melancholy. Avdotya Romanovna was remarkably good-looking; she was tall,
strikingly well-proportioned, strong and self-reliant—the latter quality was
apparent in every gesture, though it did not in the least detract from the grace
and softness of her movements. In face she resembled her brother, but she might
be described as really beautiful. Her hair was dark brown, a little lighter than her
brother’s; there was a proud light in her almost black eyes and yet at times a look
of extraordinary kindness. She was pale, but it was a healthy pallor; her face was
radiant with freshness and vigour. Her mouth was rather small; the full red lower
lip projected a little as did her chin; it was the only irregularity in her beautiful
face, but it gave it a peculiarly individual and almost haughty expression. Her
face was always more serious and thoughtful than gay; but how well smiles, how
well youthful, lighthearted, irresponsible, laughter suited her face! It was natural
enough that a warm, open, simple-hearted, honest giant like Razumihin, who had
never seen anyone like her and was not quite sober at the time, should lose his
head immediately. Besides, as chance would have it, he saw Dounia for the first
time transfigured by her love for her brother and her joy at meeting him.
Afterwards he saw her lower lip quiver with indignation at her brother’s insolent,
cruel and ungrateful words—and his fate was sealed.

