“Thirty copecks,” the latter replied, running up.
“And there is twenty copecks for vodka. See what a lot of money!” he held
out his shaking hand to Zametov with notes in it. “Red notes and blue, twentyfive roubles. Where did I get them? And where did my new clothes come from?
You know I had not a copeck. You’ve cross-examined my landlady, I’ll be
bound.... Well, that’s enough! Assez causé! Till we meet again!”
He went out, trembling all over from a sort of wild hysterical sensation, in
which there was an element of insufferable rapture. Yet he was gloomy and
terribly tired. His face was twisted as after a fit. His fatigue increased rapidly.
Any shock, any irritating sensation stimulated and revived his energies at once,
but his strength failed as quickly when the stimulus was removed.
Zametov, left alone, sat for a long time in the same place, plunged in thought.
Raskolnikov had unwittingly worked a revolution in his brain on a certain point
and had made up his mind for him conclusively.
“Ilya Petrovitch is a blockhead,” he decided.
Raskolnikov had hardly opened the door of the restaurant when he stumbled
against Razumihin on the steps. They did not see each other till they almost
knocked against each other. For a moment they stood looking each other up and
down. Razumihin was greatly astounded, then anger, real anger gleamed fiercely
in his eyes.
“So here you are!” he shouted at the top of his voice—“you ran away from
your bed! And here I’ve been looking for you under the sofa! We went up to the
garret. I almost beat Nastasya on your account. And here he is after all. Rodya!
What is the meaning of it? Tell me the whole truth! Confess! Do you hear?”
“It means that I’m sick to death of you all and I want to be alone,”
Raskolnikov answered calmly.
“Alone? When you are not able to walk, when your face is as white as a sheet
and you are gasping for breath! Idiot!... What have you been doing in the Palais
de Cristal? Own up at once!”
“Let me go!” said Raskolnikov and tried to pass him. This was too much for
Razumihin; he gripped him firmly by the shoulder.
“Let you go? You dare tell me to let you go? Do you know what I’ll do with
you directly? I’ll pick you up, tie you up in a bundle, carry you home under my
arm and lock you up!” 
