He had often crossed that little street which turns at an angle, leading from the
market-place to Sadovy Street. Of late he had often felt drawn to wander about
this district, when he felt depressed, that he might feel more so.
Now he walked along, thinking of nothing. At that point there is a great block
of buildings, entirely let out in dram shops and eating-houses; women were
continually running in and out, bare-headed and in their indoor clothes. Here and
there they gathered in groups, on the pavement, especially about the entrances to
various festive establishments in the lower storeys. From one of these a loud din,
sounds of singing, the tinkling of a guitar and shouts of merriment, floated into
the street. A crowd of women were thronging round the door; some were sitting
on the steps, others on the pavement, others were standing talking. A drunken
soldier, smoking a cigarette, was walking near them in the road, swearing; he
seemed to be trying to find his way somewhere, but had forgotten where. One
beggar was quarrelling with another, and a man dead drunk was lying right
across the road. Raskolnikov joined the throng of women, who were talking in
husky voices. They were bare-headed and wore cotton dresses and goatskin
shoes. There were women of forty and some not more than seventeen; almost all
had blackened eyes.
He felt strangely attracted by the singing and all the noise and uproar in the
saloon below.... someone could be heard within dancing frantically, marking
time with his heels to the sounds of the guitar and of a thin falsetto voice singing
a jaunty air. He listened intently, gloomily and dreamily, bending down at the
entrance and peeping inquisitively in from the pavement.
“Oh, my handsome soldier
Don’t beat me for nothing,”
trilled the thin voice of the singer. Raskolnikov felt a great desire to make out
what he was singing, as though everything depended on that.
“Shall I go in?” he thought. “They are laughing. From drink. Shall I get
drunk?”
“Won’t you come in?” one of the women asked him. Her voice was still
musical and less thick than the others, she was young and not repulsive—the
only one of the group.
“Why, she’s pretty,” he said, drawing himself up and looking at her. 
