“Why, what have I done then? Give over talking in your nonsensical riddles!
Or maybe you are drunk!”
“You may be a drunkard, perhaps, vile man, but I am not! I never touch
vodka, for it’s against my convictions. Would you believe it, he, he himself, with
his own hands gave Sofya Semyonovna that hundred-rouble note—I saw it, I
was a witness, I’ll take my oath! He did it, he!” repeated Lebeziatnikov,
addressing all.
“Are you crazy, milksop?” squealed Luzhin. “She is herself before you—she
herself here declared just now before everyone that I gave her only ten roubles.
How could I have given it to her?”
“I saw it, I saw it,” Lebeziatnikov repeated, “and though it is against my
principles, I am ready this very minute to take any oath you like before the court,
for I saw how you slipped it in her pocket. Only like a fool I thought you did it
out of kindness! When you were saying good-bye to her at the door, while you
held her hand in one hand, with the other, the left, you slipped the note into her
pocket. I saw it, I saw it!”
Luzhin turned pale.
“What lies!” he cried impudently, “why, how could you, standing by the
window, see the note? You fancied it with your short-sighted eyes. You are
raving!”
“No, I didn’t fancy it. And though I was standing some way off, I saw it all.
And though it certainly would be hard to distinguish a note from the window—
that’s true—I knew for certain that it was a hundred-rouble note, because, when
you were going to give Sofya Semyonovna ten roubles, you took up from the
table a hundred-rouble note (I saw it because I was standing near then, and an
idea struck me at once, so that I did not forget you had it in your hand). You
folded it and kept it in your hand all the time. I didn’t think of it again until,
when you were getting up, you changed it from your right hand to your left and
nearly dropped it! I noticed it because the same idea struck me again, that you
meant to do her a kindness without my seeing. You can fancy how I watched you
and I saw how you succeeded in slipping it into her pocket. I saw it, I saw it, I’ll
take my oath.”
Lebeziatnikov was almost breathless. Exclamations arose on all hands chiefly
expressive of wonder, but some were menacing in tone. They all crowded round
Pyotr Petrovitch. Katerina Ivanovna flew to Lebeziatnikov.
“I was mistaken in you! Protect her! You are the only one to take her part! She
is an orphan. God has sent you!”