“You know perhaps—yes, I told you myself,” began Svidrigaïlov, “that I was
in the debtors’ prison here, for an immense sum, and had not any expectation of
being able to pay it. There’s no need to go into particulars how Marfa Petrovna
bought me out; do you know to what a point of insanity a woman can sometimes
love? She was an honest woman, and very sensible, although completely
uneducated. Would you believe that this honest and jealous woman, after many
scenes of hysterics and reproaches, condescended to enter into a kind of contract
with me which she kept throughout our married life? She was considerably older
than I, and besides, she always kept a clove or something in her mouth. There
was so much swinishness in my soul and honesty too, of a sort, as to tell her
straight out that I couldn’t be absolutely faithful to her. This confession drove
her to frenzy, but yet she seems in a way to have liked my brutal frankness. She
thought it showed I was unwilling to deceive her if I warned her like this
beforehand and for a jealous woman, you know, that’s the first consideration.
After many tears an unwritten contract was drawn up between us: first, that I
would never leave Marfa Petrovna and would always be her husband; secondly,
that I would never absent myself without her permission; thirdly, that I would
never set up a permanent mistress; fourthly, in return for this, Marfa Petrovna
gave me a free hand with the maidservants, but only with her secret knowledge;
fifthly, God forbid my falling in love with a woman of our class; sixthly, in case
I—which God forbid—should be visited by a great serious passion I was bound
to reveal it to Marfa Petrovna. On this last score, however, Marfa Petrovna was
fairly at ease. She was a sensible woman and so she could not help looking upon
me as a dissolute profligate incapable of real love. But a sensible woman and a
jealous woman are two very different things, and that’s where the trouble came
in. But to judge some people impartially we must renounce certain preconceived
opinions and our habitual attitude to the ordinary people about us. I have reason
to have faith in your judgment rather than in anyone’s. Perhaps you have already
heard a great deal that was ridiculous and absurd about Marfa Petrovna. She
certainly had some very ridiculous ways, but I tell you frankly that I feel really
sorry for the innumerable woes of which I was the cause. Well, and that’s
enough, I think, by way of a decorous oraison funèbre for the most tender wife
of a most tender husband.