“When was it?” Raskolnikov stopped still to recollect. “Two or three days
before her death it must have been. But I am not going to redeem the things
now,” he put in with a sort of hurried and conspicuous solicitude about the
things. “I’ve not more than a silver rouble left... after last night’s accursed
delirium!”
He laid special emphasis on the delirium.
“Yes, yes,” Razumihin hastened to agree—with what was not clear. “Then
that’s why you... were stuck... partly... you know in your delirium you were
continually mentioning some rings or chains! Yes, yes... that’s clear, it’s all clear
now.”
“Hullo! How that idea must have got about among them. Here this man will
go to the stake for me, and I find him delighted at having it cleared up why I
spoke of rings in my delirium! What a hold the idea must have on all of them!”
“Shall we find him?” he asked suddenly.
“Oh, yes,” Razumihin answered quickly. “He is a nice fellow, you will see,
brother. Rather clumsy, that is to say, he is a man of polished manners, but I
mean clumsy in a different sense. He is an intelligent fellow, very much so
indeed, but he has his own range of ideas.... He is incredulous, sceptical,
cynical... he likes to impose on people, or rather to make fun of them. His is the
old, circumstantial method.... But he understands his work... thoroughly.... Last
year he cleared up a case of murder in which the police had hardly a clue. He is
very, very anxious to make your acquaintance!”
“On what grounds is he so anxious?”
“Oh, it’s not exactly... you see, since you’ve been ill I happen to have
mentioned you several times.... So, when he heard about you... about your being
a law student and not able to finish your studies, he said, ‘What a pity!’ And so I
concluded... from everything together, not only that; yesterday Zametov... you
know, Rodya, I talked some nonsense on the way home to you yesterday, when I
was drunk... I am afraid, brother, of your exaggerating it, you see.”
“What? That they think I am a madman? Maybe they are right,” he said with a
constrained smile.
“Yes, yes.... That is, pooh, no!... But all that I said (and there was something
else too) it was all nonsense, drunken nonsense.”
“But why are you apologising? I am so sick of it all!” Raskolnikov cried with
exaggerated irritability. It was partly assumed, however.
“I know, I know, I understand. Believe me, I understand. One’s ashamed to
speak of it.” 
