Meanwhile the room had become so full of people that you couldn’t have
dropped a pin. The policemen left, all except one, who remained for a time,
trying to drive out the people who came in from the stairs. Almost all Madame
Lippevechsel’s lodgers had streamed in from the inner rooms of the flat; at first
they were squeezed together in the doorway, but afterwards they overflowed into
the room. Katerina Ivanovna flew into a fury.
“You might let him die in peace, at least,” she shouted at the crowd, “is it a
spectacle for you to gape at? With cigarettes! (Cough, cough, cough!) You might
as well keep your hats on.... And there is one in his hat!... Get away! You should
respect the dead, at least!”
Her cough choked her—but her reproaches were not without result. They
evidently stood in some awe of Katerina Ivanovna. The lodgers, one after
another, squeezed back into the doorway with that strange inner feeling of
satisfaction which may be observed in the presence of a sudden accident, even in
those nearest and dearest to the victim, from which no living man is exempt,
even in spite of the sincerest sympathy and compassion.
Voices outside were heard, however, speaking of the hospital and saying that
they’d no business to make a disturbance here.
“No business to die!” cried Katerina Ivanovna, and she was rushing to the
door to vent her wrath upon them, but in the doorway came face to face with
Madame Lippevechsel who had only just heard of the accident and ran in to
restore order. She was a particularly quarrelsome and irresponsible German.
“Ah, my God!” she cried, clasping her hands, “your husband drunken horses
have trampled! To the hospital with him! I am the landlady!”
“Amalia Ludwigovna, I beg you to recollect what you are saying,” Katerina
Ivanovna began haughtily (she always took a haughty tone with the landlady that
she might “remember her place” and even now could not deny herself this
satisfaction). “Amalia Ludwigovna...”
“I have you once before told that you to call me Amalia Ludwigovna may not
dare; I am Amalia Ivanovna.”
“You are not Amalia Ivanovna, but Amalia Ludwigovna, and as I am not one
of your despicable flatterers like Mr. Lebeziatnikov, who’s laughing behind the
door at this moment (a laugh and a cry of ‘they are at it again’ was in fact
audible at the door) so I shall always call you Amalia Ludwigovna, though I fail
to understand why you dislike that name. You can see for yourself what has
happened to Semyon Zaharovitch; he is dying. I beg you to close that door at
once and to admit no one. Let him at least die in peace! Or I warn you the
Governor-General, himself, shall be informed of your conduct to-morrow. The
prince knew me as a girl; he remembers Semyon Zaharovitch well and has often
been a benefactor to him. Everyone knows that Semyon Zaharovitch had many
friends and protectors, whom he abandoned himself from an honourable pride,
knowing his unhappy weakness, but now (she pointed to Raskolnikov) a
generous young man has come to our assistance, who has wealth and
connections and whom Semyon Zaharovitch has known from a child. You may
rest assured, Amalia Ludwigovna...” 
