“A boarding-school, ha-ha-ha! A castle in the air,” cried Katerina Ivanovna,
her laugh ending in a cough. “No, Rodion Romanovitch, that dream is over! All
have forsaken us!... And that general.... You know, Rodion Romanovitch, I threw
an inkpot at him—it happened to be standing in the waiting-room by the paper
where you sign your name. I wrote my name, threw it at him and ran away. Oh,
the scoundrels, the scoundrels! But enough of them, now I’ll provide for the
children myself, I won’t bow down to anybody! She has had to bear enough for
us!” she pointed to Sonia. “Polenka, how much have you got? Show me! What,
only two farthings! Oh, the mean wretches! They give us nothing, only run after
us, putting their tongues out. There, what is that blockhead laughing at?” (She
pointed to a man in the crowd.) “It’s all because Kolya here is so stupid; I have
such a bother with him. What do you want, Polenka? Tell me in French, parlezmoi
français. Why, I’ve taught you, you know some phrases. Else how are you
to show that you are of good family, well brought-up children, and not at all like
other organ-grinders? We aren’t going to have a Punch and Judy show in the
street, but to sing a genteel song.... Ah, yes,... What are we to sing? You keep
putting me out, but we... you see, we are standing here, Rodion Romanovitch, to
find something to sing and get money, something Kolya can dance to.... For, as
you can fancy, our performance is all impromptu.... We must talk it over and
rehearse it all thoroughly, and then we shall go to Nevsky, where there are far
more people of good society, and we shall be noticed at once. Lida knows ‘My
Village’ only, nothing but ‘My Village,’ and everyone sings that. We must sing
something far more genteel.... Well, have you thought of anything, Polenka? If
only you’d help your mother! My memory’s quite gone, or I should have thought
of something. We really can’t sing ‘An Hussar.’ Ah, let us sing in French, ‘Cinq
sous,’ I have taught it you, I have taught it you. And as it is in French, people
will see at once that you are children of good family, and that will be much more
touching.... You might sing ‘Marlborough s’en va-t-en guerre,’ for that’s quite a
child’s song and is sung as a lullaby in all the aristocratic houses.
“Marlborough s’en va-t-en guerre Ne sait quand reviendra...” she began
singing. “But no, better sing ‘Cinq sous.’ Now, Kolya, your hands on your hips,
make haste, and you, Lida, keep turning the other way, and Polenka and I will
sing and clap our hands!