“Behind the door? Lying behind the door? Behind the door?” Raskolnikov
cried suddenly, staring with a blank look of terror at Razumihin, and he slowly
sat up on the sofa, leaning on his hand.
“Yes... why? What’s the matter? What’s wrong?” Razumihin, too, got up from
his seat.
“Nothing,” Raskolnikov answered faintly, turning to the wall. All were silent
for a while.
“He must have waked from a dream,” Razumihin said at last, looking
inquiringly at Zossimov. The latter slightly shook his head.
“Well, go on,” said Zossimov. “What next?”
“What next? As soon as he saw the ear-rings, forgetting Dmitri and
everything, he took up his cap and ran to Dushkin and, as we know, got a rouble
from him. He told a lie saying he found them in the street, and went off drinking.
He keeps repeating his old story about the murder: ‘I know nothing of it, never
heard of it till the day before yesterday.’ ‘And why didn’t you come to the police
till now?’ ‘I was frightened.’ ‘And why did you try to hang yourself?’ ‘From
anxiety.’ ‘What anxiety?’ ‘That I should be accused of it.’ Well, that’s the whole
story. And now what do you suppose they deduced from that?”
“Why, there’s no supposing. There’s a clue, such as it is, a fact. You wouldn’t
have your painter set free?”
“Now they’ve simply taken him for the murderer. They haven’t a shadow of
doubt.”
“That’s nonsense. You are excited. But what about the ear-rings? You must
admit that, if on the very same day and hour ear-rings from the old woman’s box
have come into Nikolay’s hands, they must have come there somehow. That’s a
good deal in such a case.”
“How did they get there? How did they get there?” cried Razumihin. “How
can you, a doctor, whose duty it is to study man and who has more opportunity
than anyone else for studying human nature—how can you fail to see the
character of the man in the whole story? Don’t you see at once that the answers
he has given in the examination are the holy truth? They came into his hand
precisely as he has told us—he stepped on the box and picked it up.” 
