“You’d better have some tea! Yes? I’ll bring it, there’s some left.”
“No... I’m going; I’ll go at once,” he muttered, getting on to his feet.
“Why, you’ll never get downstairs!”
“Yes, I’ll go.”
“As you please.”
She followed the porter out.
At once he rushed to the light to examine the sock and the rags.
“There are stains, but not very noticeable; all covered with dirt, and rubbed
and already discoloured. No one who had no suspicion could distinguish
anything. Nastasya from a distance could not have noticed, thank God!” Then
with a tremor he broke the seal of the notice and began reading; he was a long
while reading, before he understood. It was an ordinary summons from the
district police-station to appear that day at half-past nine at the office of the
district superintendent.
“But when has such a thing happened? I never have anything to do with the
police! And why just to-day?” he thought in agonising bewilderment. “Good
God, only get it over soon!”
He was flinging himself on his knees to pray, but broke into laughter—not at
the idea of prayer, but at himself.
He began, hurriedly dressing. “If I’m lost, I am lost, I don’t care! Shall I put
the sock on?” he suddenly wondered, “it will get dustier still and the traces will
be gone.”
But no sooner had he put it on than he pulled it off again in loathing and
horror. He pulled it off, but reflecting that he had no other socks, he picked it up
and put it on again—and again he laughed.
“That’s all conventional, that’s all relative, merely a way of looking at it,” he
thought in a flash, but only on the top surface of his mind, while he was
shuddering all over, “there, I’ve got it on! I have finished by getting it on!”
But his laughter was quickly followed by despair.
“No, it’s too much for me...” he thought. His legs shook. “From fear,” he
muttered. His head swam and ached with fever. “It’s a trick! They want to decoy
me there and confound me over everything,” he mused, as he went out on to the
stairs—“the worst of it is I’m almost light-headed... I may blurt out something
stupid...”
 
