Romanovitch” (as he said this Porfiry Petrovitch, who was scarcely five-andthirty,
actually seemed to have grown old; even his voice changed and he seemed
to shrink together) “Moreover, I’m a candid man... am I a candid man or not?
What do you say? I fancy I really am: I tell you these things for nothing and
don’t even expect a reward for it, he-he! Well, to proceed, wit in my opinion is a
splendid thing, it is, so to say, an adornment of nature and a consolation of life,
and what tricks it can play! So that it sometimes is hard for a poor examining
lawyer to know where he is, especially when he’s liable to be carried away by
his own fancy, too, for you know he is a man after all! But the poor fellow is
saved by the criminal’s temperament, worse luck for him! But young people
carried away by their own wit don’t think of that ‘when they overstep all
obstacles,’ as you wittily and cleverly expressed it yesterday. He will lie—that is,
the man who is a special case, the incognito, and he will lie well, in the cleverest
fashion; you might think he would triumph and enjoy the fruits of his wit, but at
the most interesting, the most flagrant moment he will faint. Of course there may
be illness and a stuffy room as well, but anyway! Anyway he’s given us the idea!
He lied incomparably, but he didn’t reckon on his temperament. That’s what
betrays him! Another time he will be carried away by his playful wit into making
fun of the man who suspects him, he will turn pale as it were on purpose to
mislead, but his paleness will be too natural, too much like the real thing, again
he has given us an idea! Though his questioner may be deceived at first, he will
think differently next day if he is not a fool, and, of course, it is like that at every
step! He puts himself forward where he is not wanted, speaks continually when
he ought to keep silent, brings in all sorts of allegorical allusions, he-he! Comes
and asks why didn’t you take me long ago? he-he-he! And that can happen, you
know, with the cleverest man, the psychologist, the literary man. The
temperament reflects everything like a mirror! Gaze into it and admire what you
see! But why are you so pale, Rodion Romanovitch? Is the room stuffy? Shall I
open the window?”
“Oh, don’t trouble, please,” cried Raskolnikov and he suddenly broke into a
laugh. “Please don’t trouble.”
Porfiry stood facing him, paused a moment and suddenly he too laughed.
Raskolnikov got up from the sofa, abruptly checking his hysterical laughter.