“Well, that’s enough, you know,” Svidrigaïlov was obviously exhilarated, but
only slightly so, he had not had more than half a glass of wine.
“I fancy you came to see me before you knew that I was capable of having
what you call an opinion of my own,” observed Raskolnikov.
“Oh, well, it was a different matter. Everyone has his own plans. And apropos
of the miracle let me tell you that I think you have been asleep for the last two or
three days. I told you of this tavern myself, there is no miracle in your coming
straight here. I explained the way myself, told you where it was, and the hours
you could find me here. Do you remember?”
“I don’t remember,” answered Raskolnikov with surprise.
“I believe you. I told you twice. The address has been stamped mechanically
on your memory. You turned this way mechanically and yet precisely according
to the direction, though you are not aware of it. When I told you then, I hardly
hoped you understood me. You give yourself away too much, Rodion
Romanovitch. And another thing, I’m convinced there are lots of people in
Petersburg who talk to themselves as they walk. This is a town of crazy people.
If only we had scientific men, doctors, lawyers and philosophers might make
most valuable investigations in Petersburg each in his own line. There are few
places where there are so many gloomy, strong and queer influences on the soul
of man as in Petersburg. The mere influences of climate mean so much. And it’s
the administrative centre of all Russia and its character must be reflected on the
whole country. But that is neither here nor there now. The point is that I have
several times watched you. You walk out of your house—holding your head high
—twenty paces from home you let it sink, and fold your hands behind your back.
You look and evidently see nothing before nor beside you. At last you begin
moving your lips and talking to yourself, and sometimes you wave one hand and
declaim, and at last stand still in the middle of the road. That’s not at all the
thing. Someone may be watching you besides me, and it won’t do you any good.
It’s nothing really to do with me and I can’t cure you, but, of course, you
understand me.”
“Do you know that I am being followed?” asked Raskolnikov, looking
inquisitively at him.