Though Katerina Ivanovna tried to appear to be disdainfully unaware of it, she
raised her voice and began at once speaking with conviction of Sonia’s
undoubted ability to assist her, of “her gentleness, patience, devotion, generosity
and good education,” tapping Sonia on the cheek and kissing her warmly twice.
Sonia flushed crimson, and Katerina Ivanovna suddenly burst into tears,
immediately observing that she was “nervous and silly, that she was too much
upset, that it was time to finish, and as the dinner was over, it was time to hand
round the tea.”
At that moment, Amalia Ivanovna, deeply aggrieved at taking no part in the
conversation, and not being listened to, made one last effort, and with secret
misgivings ventured on an exceedingly deep and weighty observation, that “in
the future boarding-school she would have to pay particular attention to die
Wäsche, and that there certainly must be a good dame to look after the linen, and
secondly that the young ladies must not novels at night read.”
Katerina Ivanovna, who certainly was upset and very tired, as well as heartily
sick of the dinner, at once cut short Amalia Ivanovna, saying “she knew nothing
about it and was talking nonsense, that it was the business of the laundry maid,
and not of the directress of a high-class boarding-school to look after die
Wäsche, and as for novel-reading, that was simply rudeness, and she begged her
to be silent.” Amalia Ivanovna fired up and getting angry observed that she only
“meant her good,” and that “she had meant her very good,” and that “it was long
since she had paid her gold for the lodgings.”
Katerina Ivanovna at once “set her down,” saying that it was a lie to say she
wished her good, because only yesterday when her dead husband was lying on
the table, she had worried her about the lodgings. To this Amalia Ivanovna very
appropriately observed that she had invited those ladies, but “those ladies had
not come, because those ladies are ladies and cannot come to a lady who is not a
lady.” Katerina Ivanovna at once pointed out to her, that as she was a slut she
could not judge what made one really a lady. Amalia Ivanovna at once declared
that her “Vater aus Berlin was a very, very important man, and both hands in
pockets went, and always used to say: ‘Poof! poof!’” and she leapt up from the
table to represent her father, sticking her hands in her pockets, puffing her
cheeks, and uttering vague sounds resembling “poof! poof!” amid loud laughter
from all the lodgers, who purposely encouraged Amalia Ivanovna, hoping for a
fight.
But this was too much for Katerina Ivanovna, and she at once declared, so that
all could hear, that Amalia Ivanovna probably never had a father, but was simply
a drunken Petersburg Finn, and had certainly once been a cook and probably
something worse. Amalia Ivanovna turned as red as a lobster and squealed that
perhaps Katerina Ivanovna never had a father, “but she had a Vater aus Berlin
and that he wore a long coat and always said poof-poof-poof!”