“In the heat of midday!... in the vale!... of Dagestan!... With lead in my
breast!...”
“Your excellency!” she wailed suddenly with a heart-rending scream and a
flood of tears, “protect the orphans! You have been their father’s guest... one
may say aristocratic....” She started, regaining consciousness, and gazed at all
with a sort of terror, but at once recognised Sonia.
“Sonia, Sonia!” she articulated softly and caressingly, as though surprised to
find her there. “Sonia darling, are you here, too?”
They lifted her up again.
“Enough! It’s over! Farewell, poor thing! I am done for! I am broken!” she
cried with vindictive despair, and her head fell heavily back on the pillow.
She sank into unconsciousness again, but this time it did not last long. Her
pale, yellow, wasted face dropped back, her mouth fell open, her leg moved
convulsively, she gave a deep, deep sigh and died.
Sonia fell upon her, flung her arms about her, and remained motionless with
her head pressed to the dead woman’s wasted bosom. Polenka threw herself at
her mother’s feet, kissing them and weeping violently. Though Kolya and Lida
did not understand what had happened, they had a feeling that it was something
terrible; they put their hands on each other’s little shoulders, stared straight at
one another and both at once opened their mouths and began screaming. They
were both still in their fancy dress; one in a turban, the other in the cap with the
ostrich feather.
And how did “the certificate of merit” come to be on the bed beside Katerina
Ivanovna? It lay there by the pillow; Raskolnikov saw it.
He walked away to the window. Lebeziatnikov skipped up to him.
“She is dead,” he said.
“Rodion Romanovitch, I must have two words with you,” said Svidrigaïlov,
coming up to them.
Lebeziatnikov at once made room for him and delicately withdrew.
Svidrigaïlov drew Raskolnikov further away.
“I will undertake all the arrangements, the funeral and that. You know it’s a
question of money and, as I told you, I have plenty to spare. I will put those two
little ones and Polenka into some good orphan asylum, and I will settle fifteen
hundred roubles to be paid to each on coming of age, so that Sofya Semyonovna
need have no anxiety about them. And I will pull her out of the mud too, for she
is a good girl, isn’t she? So tell Avdotya Romanovna that that is how I am
spending her ten thousand.”