“Your question is a wide one. I may be mistaken, but I fancy I find clearer
views, more, so to say, criticism, more practicality...”
“That’s true,” Zossimov let drop.
“Nonsense! There’s no practicality.” Razumihin flew at him. “Practicality is a
difficult thing to find; it does not drop down from heaven. And for the last two
hundred years we have been divorced from all practical life. Ideas, if you like,
are fermenting,” he said to Pyotr Petrovitch, “and desire for good exists, though
it’s in a childish form, and honesty you may find, although there are crowds of
brigands. Anyway, there’s no practicality. Practicality goes well shod.”
“I don’t agree with you,” Pyotr Petrovitch replied, with evident enjoyment.
“Of course, people do get carried away and make mistakes, but one must have
indulgence; those mistakes are merely evidence of enthusiasm for the cause and
of abnormal external environment. If little has been done, the time has been but
short; of means I will not speak. It’s my personal view, if you care to know, that
something has been accomplished already. New valuable ideas, new valuable
works are circulating in the place of our old dreamy and romantic authors.
Literature is taking a maturer form, many injurious prejudices have been rooted
up and turned into ridicule.... In a word, we have cut ourselves off irrevocably
from the past, and that, to my thinking, is a great thing...”
“He’s learnt it by heart to show off!” Raskolnikov pronounced suddenly.
“What?” asked Pyotr Petrovitch, not catching his words; but he received no
reply.
“That’s all true,” Zossimov hastened to interpose.
“Isn’t it so?” Pyotr Petrovitch went on, glancing affably at Zossimov. “You
must admit,” he went on, addressing Razumihin with a shade of triumph and
superciliousness—he almost added “young man”—“that there is an advance, or,
as they say now, progress in the name of science and economic truth...”
“A commonplace.”
“No, not a commonplace! Hitherto, for instance, if I were told, ‘love thy
neighbour,’ what came of it?” Pyotr Petrovitch went on, perhaps with excessive
haste. “It came to my tearing my coat in half to share with my neighbour and we
both were left half naked. As a Russian proverb has it, ‘Catch several hares and
you won’t catch one.’ Science now tells us, love yourself before all men, for
everything in the world rests on self-interest. You love yourself and manage your
own affairs properly and your coat remains whole. Economic truth adds that the
better private affairs are organised in society—the more whole coats, so to say—
the firmer are its foundations and the better is the common welfare organised
too. Therefore, in acquiring wealth solely and exclusively for myself, I am
acquiring, so to speak, for all, and helping to bring to pass my neighbour’s
getting a little more than a torn coat; and that not from private, personal
liberality, but as a consequence of the general advance. The idea is simple, but
unhappily it has been a long time reaching us, being hindered by idealism and
sentimentality. And yet it would seem to want very little wit to perceive it...”
“Excuse me, I’ve very little wit myself,” Razumihin cut in sharply, “and so let
us drop it. I began this discussion with an object, but I’ve grown so sick during
the last three years of this chattering to amuse oneself, of this incessant flow of
commonplaces, always the same, that, by Jove, I blush even when other people
talk like that. You are in a hurry, no doubt, to exhibit your acquirements; and I
don’t blame you, that’s quite pardonable. I only wanted to find out what sort of
man you are, for so many unscrupulous people have got hold of the progressive
cause of late and have so distorted in their own interests everything they
touched, that the whole cause has been dragged in the mire. That’s enough!”
“Excuse me, sir,” said Luzhin, affronted, and speaking with excessive dignity.
“Do you mean to suggest so unceremoniously that I too...” 
