“It’s not your revolver, it belonged to Marfa Petrovna, whom you killed,
wretch! There was nothing of yours in her house. I took it when I began to
suspect what you were capable of. If you dare to advance one step, I swear I’ll
kill you.” She was frantic.
“But your brother? I ask from curiosity,” said Svidrigaïlov, still standing
where he was.
“Inform, if you want to! Don’t stir! Don’t come nearer! I’ll shoot! You
poisoned your wife, I know; you are a murderer yourself!” She held the revolver
ready.
“Are you so positive I poisoned Marfa Petrovna?”
“You did! You hinted it yourself; you talked to me of poison.... I know you
went to get it... you had it in readiness.... It was your doing.... It must have been
your doing.... Scoundrel!”
“Even if that were true, it would have been for your sake... you would have
been the cause.”
“You are lying! I hated you always, always....”
“Oho, Avdotya Romanovna! You seem to have forgotten how you softened to
me in the heat of propaganda. I saw it in your eyes. Do you remember that
moonlight night, when the nightingale was singing?”
“That’s a lie,” there was a flash of fury in Dounia’s eyes, “that’s a lie and a
libel!”
“A lie? Well, if you like, it’s a lie. I made it up. Women ought not to be
reminded of such things,” he smiled. “I know you will shoot, you pretty wild
creature. Well, shoot away!”
Dounia raised the revolver, and deadly pale, gazed at him, measuring the
distance and awaiting the first movement on his part. Her lower lip was white
and quivering and her big black eyes flashed like fire. He had never seen her so
handsome. The fire glowing in her eyes at the moment she raised the revolver
seemed to kindle him and there was a pang of anguish in his heart. He took a
step forward and a shot rang out. The bullet grazed his hair and flew into the
wall behind. He stood still and laughed softly.
“The wasp has stung me. She aimed straight at my head. What’s this? Blood?”
he pulled out his handkerchief to wipe the blood, which flowed in a thin stream
down his right temple. The bullet seemed to have just grazed the skin.
Dounia lowered the revolver and looked at Svidrigaïlov not so much in terror
as in a sort of wild amazement. She seemed not to understand what she was
doing and what was going on.