“These last two days she hasn’t said a word to me, she hasn’t glanced at me,”
Raskolnikov thought suddenly. The sunlight was bright in the room; the incense
rose in clouds; the priest read, “Give rest, oh Lord....” Raskolnikov stayed all
through the service. As he blessed them and took his leave, the priest looked
round strangely. After the service, Raskolnikov went up to Sonia. She took both
his hands and let her head sink on his shoulder. This slight friendly gesture
bewildered Raskolnikov. It seemed strange to him that there was no trace of
repugnance, no trace of disgust, no tremor in her hand. It was the furthest limit
of self-abnegation, at least so he interpreted it.
Sonia said nothing. Raskolnikov pressed her hand and went out. He felt very
miserable. If it had been possible to escape to some solitude, he would have
thought himself lucky, even if he had to spend his whole life there. But although
he had almost always been by himself of late, he had never been able to feel
alone. Sometimes he walked out of the town on to the high road, once he had
even reached a little wood, but the lonelier the place was, the more he seemed to
be aware of an uneasy presence near him. It did not frighten him, but greatly
annoyed him, so that he made haste to return to the town, to mingle with the
crowd, to enter restaurants and taverns, to walk in busy thoroughfares. There he
felt easier and even more solitary. One day at dusk he sat for an hour listening to
songs in a tavern and he remembered that he positively enjoyed it. But at last he
had suddenly felt the same uneasiness again, as though his conscience smote
him. “Here I sit listening to singing, is that what I ought to be doing?” he
thought. Yet he felt at once that that was not the only cause of his uneasiness;
there was something requiring immediate decision, but it was something he
could not clearly understand or put into words. It was a hopeless tangle. “No,
better the struggle again! Better Porfiry again... or Svidrigaïlov.... Better some
challenge again... some attack. Yes, yes!” he thought. He went out of the tavern
and rushed away almost at a run. The thought of Dounia and his mother
suddenly reduced him almost to a panic. That night he woke up before morning
among some bushes in Krestovsky Island, trembling all over with fever; he
walked home, and it was early morning when he arrived. After some hours’ sleep
the fever left him, but he woke up late, two o’clock in the afternoon.
He remembered that Katerina Ivanovna’s funeral had been fixed for that day,
and was glad that he was not present at it. Nastasya brought him some food; he
ate and drank with appetite, almost with greediness. His head was fresher and he
was calmer than he had been for the last three days. He even felt a passing
wonder at his previous attacks of panic.
The door opened and Razumihin came in.